
1604


THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK


by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  Cladis, King of Denmark.
  Marcells, Officer.
  Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.
  Polonis, Lord Chamberlain.
  Horatio, friend to Hamlet.
  Laertes, son to Polonis.
  Voltemand, cortier.
  Cornelis, cortier.
  Rosencrantz, cortier.
  Gildenstern, cortier.
  Osric, cortier.
  A Gentleman, cortier.
  A Priest.
  Marcells, officer.
  Bernardo, officer.
  Francisco, a soldier
  Reynaldo, servant to Polonis.
  Players.
  Two Clowns, gravediggers.
  Fortinbras, Prince of Norway.  
  A Norwegian Captain.
  English Ambassadors.

  Getrde, Qeen of Denmark, mother to Hamlet.
  Ophelia, daghter to Polonis.

  Ghost of Hamlet's Father.

  Lords, ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, Attendants.





SCENE.- Elsinore.


ACT I. Scene I.
Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.

Enter two Sentinels-[first,] Francisco, [who paces p and down
at his post; then] Bernardo, [who approaches him].

  Ber. Who's there.?
  Fran. Nay, answer me. Stand and nfold yorself.
  Ber. Long live the King!
  Fran. Bernardo?
  Ber. He.
  Fran. Yo come most careflly pon yor hor.
  Ber. 'Tis now strck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
  Fran. For this relief mch thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
    And I am sick at heart.
  Ber. Have yo had qiet gard?
  Fran. Not a mose stirring.
  Ber. Well, good night.
    If yo do meet Horatio and Marcells,
    The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

                    Enter Horatio and Marcells.  

  Fran. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
  Hor. Friends to this grond.
  Mar. And liegemen to the Dane.
  Fran. Give yo good night.
  Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier.
    Who hath reliev'd yo?
  Fran. Bernardo hath my place.
    Give yo good night.                                   Exit.
  Mar. Holla, Bernardo!
  Ber. Say-
    What, is Horatio there ?
  Hor. A piece of him.
  Ber. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcells.
  Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
  Ber. I have seen nothing.
  Mar. Horatio says 'tis bt or fantasy,
    And will not let belief take hold of him
    Toching this dreaded sight, twice seen of s.
    Therefore I have entreated him along,  
    With s to watch the mintes of this night,
    That, if again this apparition come,
    He may approve or eyes and speak to it.
  Hor. Tsh, tsh, 'twill not appear.
  Ber. Sit down awhile,
    And let s once again assail yor ears,
    That are so fortified against or story,
    What we two nights have seen.
  Hor. Well, sit we down,
    And let s hear Bernardo speak of this.
  Ber. Last night of all,
    When yond same star that's westward from the pole
    Had made his corse t' illme that part of heaven
    Where now it brns, Marcells and myself,
    The bell then beating one-

                        Enter Ghost.

  Mar. Peace! break thee off! Look where it comes again!
  Ber. In the same figre, like the King that's dead.  
  Mar. Tho art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.
  Ber. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
  Hor. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
  Ber. It wold be spoke to.
  Mar. Qestion it, Horatio.
  Hor. What art tho that srp'st this time of night
    Together with that fair and warlike form
    In which the majesty of bried Denmark
    Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!
  Mar. It is offended.
  Ber. See, it stalks away!
  Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
                                                     Exit Ghost.
  Mar. 'Tis gone and will not answer.
  Ber. How now, Horatio? Yo tremble and look pale.
    Is not this something more than fantasy?
    What think yo on't?
  Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe
    Withot the sensible and tre avoch
    Of mine own eyes.  
  Mar. Is it not like the King?
  Hor. As tho art to thyself.
    Sch was the very armor he had on
    When he th' ambitios Norway combated.
    So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
    He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
    'Tis strange.
  Mar. Ths twice before, and jmp at this dead hor,
    With martial stalk hath he gone by or watch.
  Hor. In what particlar thoght to work I know not;
    Bt, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
    This bodes some strange erption to or state.
  Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
    Why this same strict and most observant watch
    So nightly toils the sbject of the land,
    And why sch daily cast of brazen cannon
    And foreign mart for implements of war;
    Why sch impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
    Does not divide the Snday from the week.
    What might be toward, that this sweaty haste  
    Doth make the night joint-laborer with the day?
    Who is't that can inform me?
  Hor. That can I.
    At least, the whisper goes so. Or last king,
    Whose image even bt now appear'd to s,
    Was, as yo know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
    Thereto prick'd on by a most emlate pride,
    Dar'd to the combat; in which or valiant Hamlet
    (For so this side of or known world esteem'd him)
    Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
    Well ratified by law and heraldry,
    Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
    Which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqeror;
    Against the which a moiety competent
    Was gaged by or king; which had retrn'd
    To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
    Had he been vanqisher, as, by the same comart
    And carriage of the article design'd,
    His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, yong Fortinbras,
    Of nimproved mettle hot and fll,  
    Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
    Shark'd p a list of lawless resoltes,
    For food and diet, to some enterprise
    That hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
    As it doth well appear nto or state,
    Bt to recover of s, by strong hand
    And terms complsatory, those foresaid lands
    So by his father lost; and this, I take it,
    Is the main motive of or preparations,
    The sorce of this or watch, and the chief head
    Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
  Ber. I think it be no other bt e'en so.
    Well may it sort that this portentos figre
    Comes armed throgh or watch, so like the King
    That was and is the qestion of these wars.
  Hor. A mote it is to troble the mind's eye.
    In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
    A little ere the mightiest Jlis fell,
    The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
    Did sqeak and gibber in the Roman streets;  
    As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
    Disasters in the sn; and the moist star
    Upon whose inflence Neptne's empire stands
    Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
    And even the like precrse of fierce events,
    As harbingers preceding still the fates
    And prologe to the omen coming on,
    Have heaven and earth together demonstrated
    Unto or climatre and contrymen.

                      Enter Ghost again.

    Bt soft! behold! Lo, where it comes again!
    I'll cross it, thogh it blast me.- Stay illsion!
                                               Spreads his arms.
    If tho hast any sond, or se of voice,
    Speak to me.
    If there be any good thing to be done,
    That may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
    Speak to me.  
    If tho art privy to thy contry's fate,
    Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
    O, speak!
    Or if tho hast phoarded in thy life
    Extorted treasre in the womb of earth
    (For which, they say, yo spirits oft walk in death),
                                                 The cock crows.
    Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Marcells!
  Mar. Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
  Hor. Do, if it will not stand.
  Ber. 'Tis here!
  Hor. 'Tis here!
  Mar. 'Tis gone!
                                                     Exit Ghost.
    We do it wrong, being so majestical,
    To offer it the show of violence;
    For it is as the air, invlnerable,
    And or vain blows malicios mockery.
  Ber. It was abot to speak, when the cock crew.
  Hor. And then it started, like a gilty thing  
    Upon a fearfl smmons. I have heard
    The cock, that is the trmpet to the morn,
    Doth with his lofty and shrill-sonding throat
    Awake the god of day; and at his warning,
    Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
    Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
    To his confine; and of the trth herein
    This present object made probation.
  Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock.
    Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes
    Wherein or Savior's birth is celebrated,
    The bird of dawning singeth all night long;
    And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
    The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
    No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
    So hallow'd and so gracios is the time.
  Hor. So have I heard and do in part believe it.
    Bt look, the morn, in rsset mantle clad,
    Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
    Break we or watch p; and by my advice  
    Let s impart what we have seen to-night
    Unto yong Hamlet; for, pon my life,
    This spirit, dmb to s, will speak to him.
    Do yo consent we shall acqaint him with it,
    As needfl in or loves, fitting or dty?
    Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know
    Where we shall find him most conveniently.           Exent.




Scene II.
Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.

Florish. [Enter Cladis, King of Denmark, Gertrde the Qeen, Hamlet,
Polonis, Laertes and his sister Ophelia, [Voltemand, Cornelis,]
Lords Attendant.

  King. Thogh yet of Hamlet or dear brother's death
    The memory be green, and that it s befitted
    To bear or hearts in grief, and or whole kingdom
    To be contracted in one brow of woe,
    Yet so far hath discretion foght with natre
    That we with wisest sorrow think on him
    Together with remembrance of orselves.
    Therefore or sometime sister, now or qeen,
    Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
    Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,
    With an aspicios, and a dropping eye,
    With mirth in fneral, and with dirge in marriage,
    In eqal scale weighing delight and dole,
    Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd
    Yor better wisdoms, which have freely gone  
    With this affair along. For all, or thanks.
    Now follows, that yo know, yong Fortinbras,
    Holding a weak spposal of or worth,
    Or thinking by or late dear brother's death
    Or state to be disjoint and ot of frame,
    Colleaged with this dream of his advantage,
    He hath not fail'd to pester s with message
    Importing the srrender of those lands
    Lost by his father, with all bands of law,
    To or most valiant brother. So mch for him.
    Now for orself and for this time of meeting.
    Ths mch the bsiness is: we have here writ
    To Norway, ncle of yong Fortinbras,
    Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
    Of this his nephew's prpose, to sppress
    His frther gait herein, in that the levies,
    The lists, and fll proportions are all made
    Ot of his sbject; and we here dispatch
    Yo, good Cornelis, and yo, Voltemand,
    For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,  
    Giving to yo no frther personal power
    To bsiness with the King, more than the scope
    Of these dilated articles allow.            [Gives a paper.]
    Farewell, and let yor haste commend yor dty.
  Cor., Volt. In that, and all things, will we show or dty.
  King. We dobt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
                                 Exent Voltemand and Cornelis.
    And now, Laertes, what's the news with yo?
    Yo told s of some sit. What is't, Laertes?
    Yo cannot speak of reason to the Dane
    And lose yor voice. What woldst tho beg, Laertes,
    That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
    The head is not more native to the heart,
    The hand more instrmental to the moth,
    Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
    What woldst tho have, Laertes?
  Laer. My dread lord,
    Yor leave and favor to retrn to France;
    From whence thogh willingly I came to Denmark
    To show my dty in yor coronation,  
    Yet now I mst confess, that dty done,
    My thoghts and wishes bend again toward France
    And bow them to yor gracios leave and pardon.
  King. Have yo yor father's leave? What says Polonis?
  Pol. He hath, my lord, wrng from me my slow leave
    By laborsome petition, and at last
    Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent.
    I do beseech yo give him leave to go.
  King. Take thy fair hor, Laertes. Time be thine,
    And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
    Bt now, my cosin Hamlet, and my son-
  Ham. [aside] A little more than kin, and less than kind!
  King. How is it that the clods still hang on yo?
  Ham. Not so, my lord. I am too mch i' th' sn.
  Qeen. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
    And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
    Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
    Seek for thy noble father in the dst.
    Tho know'st 'tis common. All that lives mst die,
    Passing throgh natre to eternity.  
  Ham. Ay, madam, it is common.
  Qeen. If it be,
    Why seems it so particlar with thee?
  Ham. Seems, madam, Nay, it is. I know not 'seems.'
    'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
    Nor cstomary sits of solemn black,
    Nor windy sspiration of forc'd breath,
    No, nor the fritfl river in the eye,
    Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
    Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
    'That can denote me trly. These indeed seem,
    For they are actions that a man might play;
    Bt I have that within which passeth show-
    These bt the trappings and the sits of woe.
  King. 'Tis sweet and commendable in yor natre, Hamlet,
    To give these morning dties to yor father;
    Bt yo mst know, yor father lost a father;
    That father lost, lost his, and the srvivor bond
    In filial obligation for some term
    To do obseqios sorrow. Bt to persever  
    In obstinate condolement is a corse
    Of impios stbbornness. 'Tis nmanly grief;
    It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
    A heart nfortified, a mind impatient,
    An nderstanding simple and nschool'd;
    For what we know mst be, and is as common
    As any the most vlgar thing to sense,
    Why shold we in or peevish opposition
    Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a falt to heaven,
    A falt against the dead, a falt to natre,
    To reason most absrd, whose common theme
    Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
    From the first corse till he that died to-day,
    'This mst be so.' We pray yo throw to earth
    This nprevailing woe, and think of s
    As of a father; for let the world take note
    Yo are the most immediate to or throne,
    And with no less nobility of love
    Than that which dearest father bears his son
    Do I impart toward yo. For yor intent  
    In going back to school in Wittenberg,
    It is most retrograde to or desire;
    And we beseech yo, bend yo to remain
    Here in the cheer and comfort of or eye,
    Or chiefest cortier, cosin, and or son.
  Qeen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
    I pray thee stay with s, go not to Wittenberg.
  Ham. I shall in all my best obey yo, madam.
  King. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
    Be as orself in Denmark. Madam, come.
    This gentle and nforc'd accord of Hamlet
    Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
    No jocnd health that Denmark drinks to-day
    Bt the great cannon to the clods shall tell,
    And the King's rose the heaven shall brit again,
    Respeaking earthly thnder. Come away.
                                Florish. Exent all bt Hamlet.
  Ham. O that this too too solid flesh wold melt,
    Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
    Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd  
    His canon 'gainst self-slaghter! O God! God!
    How weary, stale, flat, and nprofitable
    Seem to me all the ses of this world!
    Fie on't! ah, fie! 'Tis an nweeded garden
    That grows to seed; things rank and gross in natre
    Possess it merely. That it shold come to this!
    Bt two months dead! Nay, not so mch, not two.
    So excellent a king, that was to this
    Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
    That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
    Visit her face too roghly. Heaven and earth!
    Mst I remember? Why, she wold hang on him
    As if increase of appetite had grown
    By what it fed on; and yet, within a month-
    Let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman!-
    A little month, or ere those shoes were old
    With which she followed my poor father's body
    Like Niobe, all tears- why she, even she
    (O God! a beast that wants discorse of reason
    Wold have morn'd longer) married with my ncle;  
    My father's brother, bt no more like my father
    Than I to Hercles. Within a month,
    Ere yet the salt of most nrighteos tears
    Had left the flshing in her galled eyes,
    She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
    With sch dexterity to incestos sheets!
    It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
    Bt break my heart, for I mst hold my tonge!

          Enter Horatio, Marcells, and Bernardo.

  Hor. Hail to yor lordship!
  Ham. I am glad to see yo well.
    Horatio!- or I do forget myself.
  Hor. The same, my lord, and yor poor servant ever.
  Ham. Sir, my good friend- I'll change that name with yo.
    And what make yo from Wittenberg, Horatio?
    Marcells?
  Mar. My good lord!
  Ham. I am very glad to see yo.- [To Bernardo] Good even, sir.-  
    Bt what, in faith, make yo from Wittenberg?
  Hor. A trant disposition, good my lord.
  Ham. I wold not hear yor enemy say so,
    Nor shall yo do my ear that violence
    To make it trster of yor own report
    Against yorself. I know yo are no trant.
    Bt what is yor affair in Elsinore?
    We'll teach yo to drink deep ere yo depart.
  Hor. My lord, I came to see yor father's fneral.
  Ham. I prithee do not mock me, fellow stdent.
    I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
  Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard pon.
  Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The fneral bak'd meats
    Did coldly frnish forth the marriage tables.
    Wold I had met my dearest foe in heaven
    Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
    My father- methinks I see my father.
  Hor. O, where, my lord?
  Ham. In my mind's eye, Horatio.
  Hor. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.  
  Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all.
    I shall not look pon his like again.
  Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
  Ham. Saw? who?
  Hor. My lord, the King yor father.
  Ham. The King my father?
  Hor. Season yor admiration for a while
    With an attent ear, till I may deliver
    Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
    This marvel to yo.
  Ham. For God's love let me hear!
  Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen
    (Marcells and Bernardo) on their watch
    In the dead vast and middle of the night
    Been ths encont'red. A figre like yor father,
    Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
    Appears before them and with solemn march
    Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
    By their oppress'd and fear-srprised eyes,
    Within his trncheon's length; whilst they distill'd  
    Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
    Stand dmb and speak not to him. This to me
    In dreadfl secrecy impart they did,
    And I with them the third night kept the watch;
    Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
    Form of the thing, each word made tre and good,
    The apparition comes. I knew yor father.
    These hands are not more like.
  Ham. Bt where was this?
  Mar. My lord, pon the platform where we watch'd.
  Ham. Did yo not speak to it?
  Hor. My lord, I did;
    Bt answer made it none. Yet once methoght
    It lifted p it head and did address
    Itself to motion, like as it wold speak;
    Bt even then the morning cock crew lod,
    And at the sond it shrnk in haste away
    And vanish'd from or sight.
  Ham. 'Tis very strange.
  Hor. As I do live, my honor'd lord, 'tis tre;  
    And we did think it writ down in or dty
    To let yo know of it.
  Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs. Bt this trobles me.
    Hold yo the watch to-night?
  Both [Mar. and Ber.] We do, my lord.
  Ham. Arm'd, say yo?
  Both. Arm'd, my lord.
  Ham. From top to toe?
  Both. My lord, from head to foot.
  Ham. Then saw yo not his face?
  Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver p.
  Ham. What, look'd he frowningly.
  Hor. A contenance more in sorrow than in anger.
  Ham. Pale or red?
  Hor. Nay, very pale.
  Ham. And fix'd his eyes pon yo?
  Hor. Most constantly.
  Ham. I wold I had been there.
  Hor. It wold have mch amaz'd yo.
  Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?  
  Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hndred.
  Both. Longer, longer.
  Hor. Not when I saw't.
  Ham. His beard was grizzled- no?
  Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life,
    A sable silver'd.
  Ham. I will watch to-night.
    Perchance 'twill walk again.
  Hor. I warr'nt it will.
  Ham. If it assme my noble father's person,
    I'll speak to it, thogh hell itself shold gape
    And bid me hold my peace. I pray yo all,
    If yo have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
    Let it be tenable in yor silence still;
    And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
    Give it an nderstanding bt no tonge.
    I will reqite yor loves. So, fare yo well.
    Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
    I'll visit yo.
  All. Or dty to yor honor.  
  Ham. Yor loves, as mine to yo. Farewell.
                                        Exent [all bt Hamlet].
    My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.
    I dobt some fol play. Wold the night were come!
    Till then sit still, my sol. Fol deeds will rise,
    Thogh all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
Exit.




Scene III.
Elsinore. A room in the hose of Polonis.

Enter Laertes and Ophelia.

  Laer. My necessaries are embark'd. Farewell.
    And, sister, as the winds give benefit
    And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
    Bt let me hear from yo.
  Oph. Do yo dobt that?
  Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
    Hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood;
    A violet in the yoth of primy natre,
    Forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;
    The perfme and sppliance of a minte;
    No more.
  Oph. No more bt so?
  Laer. Think it no more.
    For natre crescent does not grow alone
    In thews and blk; bt as this temple waxes,
    The inward service of the mind and sol
    Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves yo now,  
    And now no soil nor catel doth besmirch
    The virte of his will; bt yo mst fear,
    His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
    For he himself is sbject to his birth.
    He may not, as nvaled persons do,
    Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
    The safety and health of this whole state,
    And therefore mst his choice be circmscrib'd
    Unto the voice and yielding of that body
    Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves yo,
    It fits yor wisdom so far to believe it
    As he in his particlar act and place
    May give his saying deed; which is no frther
    Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
    Then weigh what loss yor honor may sstain
    If with too credent ear yo list his songs,
    Or lose yor heart, or yor chaste treasre open
    To his nmast'red importnity.
    Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
    And keep yo in the rear of yor affection,  
    Ot of the shot and danger of desire.
    The chariest maid is prodigal enogh
    If she nmask her beaty to the moon.
    Virte itself scopes not calmnios strokes.
    The canker galls the infants of the spring
    Too oft before their bttons be disclos'd,
    And in the morn and liqid dew of yoth
    Contagios blastments are most imminent.
    Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.
    Yoth to itself rebels, thogh none else near.
  Oph. I shall th' effect of this good lesson keep
    As watchman to my heart. Bt, good my brother,
    Do not as some ngracios pastors do,
    Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
    Whiles, like a pff'd and reckless libertine,
    Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
    And recks not his own rede.
  Laer. O, fear me not!

                       Enter Polonis.  

    I stay too long. Bt here my father comes.
    A doble blessing is a doble grace;
    Occasion smiles pon a second leave.
  Pol. Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
    The wind sits in the sholder of yor sail,
    And yo are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!
    And these few precepts in thy memory
    Look tho character. Give thy thoghts no tonge,
    Nor any nproportion'd thoght his act.
    Be tho familiar, bt by no means vlgar:
    Those friends tho hast, and their adoption tried,
    Grapple them nto thy sol with hoops of steel;
    Bt do not dll thy palm with entertainment
    Of each new-hatch'd, nfledg'd comrade. Beware
    Of entrance to a qarrel; bt being in,
    Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
    Give every man thine ear, bt few thy voice;
    Take each man's censre, bt reserve thy jdgment.
    Costly thy habit as thy prse can by,  
    Bt not express'd in fancy; rich, not gady;
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
    And they in France of the best rank and station
    Are most select and generos, chief in that.
    Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
    For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
    And borrowing dlls the edge of hsbandry.
    This above all- to thine own self be tre,
    And it mst follow, as the night the day,
    Tho canst not then be false to any man.
    Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
  Laer. Most hmbly do I take my leave, my lord.
  Pol. The time invites yo. Go, yor servants tend.
  Laer. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
    What I have said to yo.
  Oph. 'Tis in my memory lock'd,
    And yo yorself shall keep the key of it.
  Laer. Farewell.                                          Exit.
  Pol. What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to yo?
  Oph. So please yo, something toching the Lord Hamlet.  
  Pol. Marry, well bethoght!
    'Tis told me he hath very oft of late
    Given private time to yo, and yo yorself
    Have of yor adience been most free and bonteos.
    If it be so- as so 'tis pt on me,
    And that in way of cation- I mst tell yo
    Yo do not nderstand yorself so clearly
    As it behooves my daghter and yor honor.
    What is between yo? Give me p the trth.
  Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
    Of his affection to me.
  Pol. Affection? Pooh! Yo speak like a green girl,
    Unsifted in sch perilos circmstance.
    Do yo believe his tenders, as yo call them?
  Oph. I do not know, my lord, what I shold think,
  Pol. Marry, I will teach yo! Think yorself a baby
    That yo have ta'en these tenders for tre pay,
    Which are not sterling. Tender yorself more dearly,
    Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
    Rnning it ths) yo'll tender me a fool.  
  Oph. My lord, he hath importn'd me with love
    In honorable fashion.
  Pol. Ay, fashion yo may call it. Go to, go to!
  Oph. And hath given contenance to his speech, my lord,
    With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
  Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
    When the blood brns, how prodigal the sol
    Lends the tonge vows. These blazes, daghter,
    Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
    Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
    Yo mst not take for fire. From this time
    Be something scanter of yor maiden presence.
    Set yor entreatments at a higher rate
    Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
    Believe so mch in him, that he is yong,
    And with a larger tether may he walk
    Than may be given yo. In few, Ophelia,
    Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
    Not of that dye which their investments show,
    Bt mere implorators of nholy sits,  
    Breathing like sanctified and pios bawds,
    The better to begile. This is for all:
    I wold not, in plain terms, from this time forth
    Have yo so slander any moment leisre
    As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
    Look to't, I charge yo. Come yor ways.
  Oph. I shall obey, my lord.
                                                         Exent.




Scene IV.
Elsinore. The platform before the Castle.

Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcells.

  Ham. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
  Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air.
  Ham. What hor now?
  Hor. I think it lacks of twelve.
  Mar. No, it is strck.
  Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
    Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
                   A florish of trmpets, and two pieces go off.
    What does this mean, my lord?
  Ham. The King doth wake to-night and takes his rose,
    Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring pspring reels,
    And, as he drains his draghts of Rhenish down,
    The kettledrm and trmpet ths bray ot
    The trimph of his pledge.
  Hor. Is it a cstom?
  Ham. Ay, marry, is't;
    Bt to my mind, thogh I am native here  
    And to the manner born, it is a cstom
    More honor'd in the breach than the observance.
    This heavy-headed revel east and west
    Makes s tradc'd and tax'd of other nations;
    They clip s drnkards and with swinish phrase
    Soil or addition; and indeed it takes
    From or achievements, thogh perform'd at height,
    The pith and marrow of or attribte.
    So oft it chances in particlar men
    That, for some vicios mole of natre in them,
    As in their birth,- wherein they are not gilty,
    Since natre cannot choose his origin,-
    By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
    Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
    Or by some habit that too mch o'erleavens
    The form of plasive manners, that these men
    Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
    Being natre's livery, or fortne's star,
    Their virtes else- be they as pre as grace,
    As infinite as man may ndergo-  
    Shall in the general censre take corrption
    From that particlar falt. The dram of e'il
    Doth all the noble sbstance often dot To his own scandal.

                         Enter Ghost.

  Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!
  Ham. Angels and ministers of grace defend s!
    Be tho a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
    Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
    Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
    Tho com'st in sch a qestionable shape
    That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee Hamlet,
    King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me?
    Let me not brst in ignorance, bt tell
    Why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,
    Have brst their cerements; why the seplchre
    Wherein we saw thee qietly inrn'd,
    Hath op'd his ponderos and marble jaws
    To cast thee p again. What may this mean  
    That tho, dead corse, again in complete steel,
    Revisits ths the glimpses of the moon,
    Making night hideos, and we fools of natre
    So horridly to shake or disposition
    With thoghts beyond the reaches of or sols?
    Say, why is this? wherefore? What shold we do?
                                           Ghost beckons Hamlet.
  Hor. It beckons yo to go away with it,
    As if it some impartment did desire
    To yo alone.
  Mar. Look with what corteos action
    It waves yo to a more removed grond.
    Bt do not go with it!
  Hor. No, by no means!
  Ham. It will not speak. Then will I follow it.
  Hor. Do not, my lord!
  Ham. Why, what shold be the fear?
    I do not set my life at a pin's fee;
    And for my sol, what can it do to that,
    Being a thing immortal as itself?  
    It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
  Hor. What if it tempt yo toward the flood, my lord,
    Or to the dreadfl smmit of the cliff
    That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
    And there assme some other, horrible form
    Which might deprive yor sovereignty of reason
    And draw yo into madness? Think of it.
    The very place pts toys of desperation,
    Withot more motive, into every brain
    That looks so many fadoms to the sea
    And hears it roar beneath.
  Ham. It waves me still.
    Go on. I'll follow thee.
  Mar. Yo shall not go, my lord.
  Ham. Hold off yor hands!
  Hor. Be rl'd. Yo shall not go.
  Ham. My fate cries ot
    And makes each petty artire in this body
    As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
                                                [Ghost beckons.]  
    Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.
    By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!-
    I say, away!- Go on. I'll follow thee.
                                        Exent Ghost and Hamlet.
  Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.
  Mar. Let's follow. 'Tis not fit ths to obey him.
  Hor. Have after. To what isse wail this come?
  Mar. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
  Hor. Heaven will direct it.
  Mar. Nay, let's follow him.
                                                         Exent.




Scene V.
Elsinore. The Castle. Another part of the fortifications.

Enter Ghost and Hamlet.

  Ham. Whither wilt tho lead me? Speak! I'll go no frther.
  Ghost. Mark me.
  Ham. I will.
  Ghost. My hor is almost come,
    When I to slph'ros and tormenting flames
    Mst render p myself.
  Ham. Alas, poor ghost!
  Ghost. Pity me not, bt lend thy serios hearing
    To what I shall nfold.
  Ham. Speak. I am bond to hear.
  Ghost. So art tho to revenge, when tho shalt hear.
  Ham. What?
  Ghost. I am thy father's spirit,
    Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
    And for the day confin'd to fast in fires,
    Till the fol crimes done in my days of natre
    Are brnt and prg'd away. Bt that I am forbid  
    To tell the secrets of my prison hose,
    I cold a tale nfold whose lightest word
    Wold harrow p thy sol, freeze thy yong blood,
    Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
    Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
    And each particlar hair to stand an end
    Like qills pon the fretfl porpentine.
    Bt this eternal blazon mst not be
    To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
    If tho didst ever thy dear father love-
  Ham. O God!
  Ghost. Revenge his fol and most nnatral mrther.
  Ham. Mrther?
  Ghost. Mrther most fol, as in the best it is;
    Bt this most fol, strange, and nnatral.
  Ham. Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift
    As meditation or the thoghts of love,
    May sweep to my revenge.
  Ghost. I find thee apt;
    And dller sholdst tho be than the fat weed  
    That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
    Woldst tho not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
    'Tis given ot that, sleeping in my orchard,
    A serpent stng me. So the whole ear of Denmark
    Is by a forged process of my death
    Rankly abs'd. Bt know, tho noble yoth,
    The serpent that did sting thy father's life
    Now wears his crown.
  Ham. O my prophetic sol!
    My ncle?
  Ghost. Ay, that incestos, that adlterate beast,
    With witchcraft of his wit, with traitoros gifts-
    O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
    So to sedce!- won to his shamefl lst
    The will of my most seeming-virtos qeen.
    O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there,
    From me, whose love was of that dignity
    That it went hand in hand even with the vow
    I made to her in marriage, and to decline
    Upon a wretch whose natral gifts were poor  
    To those of mine!
    Bt virte, as it never will be mov'd,
    Thogh lewdness cort it in a shape of heaven,
    So lst, thogh to a radiant angel link'd,
    Will sate itself in a celestial bed
    And prey on garbage.
    Bt soft! methinks I scent the morning air.
    Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
    My cstom always of the afternoon,
    Upon my secre hor thy ncle stole,
    With jice of crsed hebona in a vial,
    And in the porches of my ears did por
    The leperos distilment; whose effect
    Holds sch an enmity with blood of man
    That swift as qicksilverr it corses throgh
    The natral gates and alleys of the body,
    And with a sdden vigor it doth posset
    And crd, like eager droppings into milk,
    The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;
    And a most instant tetter bark'd abot,  
    Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crst
    All my smooth body.
    Ths was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
    Of life, of crown, of qeen, at once dispatch'd;
    Ct off even in the blossoms of my sin,
    Unhos'led, disappointed, nanel'd,
    No reckoning made, bt sent to my accont
    With all my imperfections on my head.
  Ham. O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!
  Ghost. If tho hast natre in thee, bear it not.
    Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
    A coch for lxry and damned incest.
    Bt, howsoever tho prsest this act,
    Taint not thy mind, nor let thy sol contrive
    Against thy mother aght. Leave her to heaven,
    And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
    To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
    The glowworm shows the matin to be near
    And gins to pale his neffectal fire.
    Adie, adie, adie! Remember me.                      Exit.  
  Ham. O all yo host of heaven! O earth! What else?
    And shall I cople hell? Hold, hold, my heart!
    And yo, my sinews, grow not instant old,
    Bt bear me stiffly p. Remember thee?
    Ay, tho poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
    In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
    Yea, from the table of my memory
    I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
    All saws of books, all forms, all pressres past
    That yoth and observation copied there,
    And thy commandment all alone shall live
    Within the book and volme of my brain,
    Unmix'd with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
    O most pernicios woman!
    O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
    My tables! Meet it is I set it down
    That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
    At least I am sre it may be so in Denmark.        [Writes.]
    So, ncle, there yo are. Now to my word:
    It is 'Adie, adie! Remember me.'  
    I have sworn't.
  Hor. (within) My lord, my lord!

                   Enter Horatio and Marcells.

  Mar. Lord Hamlet!
  Hor. Heaven secre him!
  Ham. So be it!
  Mar. Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
  Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.
  Mar. How is't, my noble lord?
  Hor. What news, my lord?
  Mar. O, wonderfl!
  Hor. Good my lord, tell it.
  Ham. No, yo will reveal it.
  Hor. Not I, my lord, by heaven!
  Mar. Nor I, my lord.
  Ham. How say yo then? Wold heart of man once think it?
    Bt yo'll be secret?
  Both. Ay, by heaven, my lord.  
  Ham. There's neer a villain dwelling in all Denmark
    Bt he's an arrant knave.
  Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
    To tell s this.
  Ham. Why, right! Yo are in the right!
    And so, withot more circmstance at all,
    I hold it fit that we shake hands and part;
    Yo, as yor bsiness and desires shall point yo,
    For every man hath bsiness and desire,
    Sch as it is; and for my own poor part,
    Look yo, I'll go pray.
  Hor. These are bt wild and whirling words, my lord.
  Ham. I am sorry they offend yo, heartily;
    Yes, faith, heartily.
  Hor. There's no offence, my lord.
  Ham. Yes, by Saint Patrick, bt there is, Horatio,
    And mch offence too. Toching this vision here,
    It is an honest ghost, that let me tell yo.
    For yor desire to know what is between s,
    O'ermaster't as yo may. And now, good friends,  
    As yo are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
    Give me one poor reqest.
  Hor. What is't, my lord? We will.
  Ham. Never make known what yo have seen to-night.
  Both. My lord, we will not.
  Ham. Nay, bt swear't.
  Hor. In faith,
    My lord, not I.
  Mar. Nor I, my lord- in faith.
  Ham. Upon my sword.
  Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already.
  Ham. Indeed, pon my sword, indeed.

                 Ghost cries nder the stage.

  Ghost. Swear.
  Ham. Aha boy, say'st tho so? Art tho there, trepenny?
    Come on! Yo hear this fellow in the cellarage.
    Consent to swear.
  Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.  
  Ham. Never to speak of this that yo have seen.
    Swear by my sword.
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear.
  Ham. Hic et biqe? Then we'll shift or grond.
    Come hither, gentlemen,
    And lay yor hands again pon my sword.
    Never to speak of this that yo have heard:
    Swear by my sword.
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear by his sword.
  Ham. Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth so fast?
    A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends."
  Hor. O day and night, bt this is wondros strange!
  Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
    There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
    Than are dreamt of in yor philosophy.
    Bt come!
    Here, as before, never, so help yo mercy,
    How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself
    (As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
    To pt an antic disposition on),  
    That yo, at sch times seeing me, never shall,
    With arms encmb'red ths, or this head-shake,
    Or by prononcing of some dobtfl phrase,
    As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We cold, an if we wold,'
    Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'
    Or sch ambigos giving ot, to note
    That yo know aght of me- this is not to do,
    So grace and mercy at yor most need help yo,
    Swear.
  Ghost. [beneath] Swear.
                                                   [They swear.]
  Ham. Rest, rest, pertrbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
    With all my love I do commend me to yo;
    And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
    May do t' express his love and friending to yo,
    God willing, shall not lack. Let s go in together;
    And still yor fingers on yor lips, I pray.
    The time is ot of joint. O crsed spite
    That ever I was born to set it right!
    Nay, come, let's go together.  
                                                         Exent.




Act II. Scene I.
Elsinore. A room in the hose of Polonis.

Enter Polonis and Reynaldo.

  Pol. Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
  Rey. I will, my lord.
  Pol. Yo shall do marvell's wisely, good Reynaldo,
    Before Yo visit him, to make inqire
    Of his behavior.
  Rey. My lord, I did intend it.
  Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look yo, sir,
    Enqire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
    And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
    What company, at what expense; and finding
    By this encompassment and drift of qestion
    That they do know my son, come yo more nearer
    Than yor particlar demands will toch it.
    Take yo, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
    As ths, 'I know his father and his friends,
    And in part him.' Do yo mark this, Reynaldo?
  Rey. Ay, very well, my lord.  
  Pol. 'And in part him, bt,' yo may say, 'not well.
    Bt if't be he I mean, he's very wild
    Addicted so and so'; and there pt on him
    What forgeries yo please; marry, none so rank
    As may dishonor him- take heed of that;
    Bt, sir, sch wanton, wild, and sal slips
    As are companions noted and most known
    To yoth and liberty.
  Rey. As gaming, my lord.
  Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, qarrelling,
    Drabbing. Yo may go so far.
  Rey. My lord, that wold dishonor him.
  Pol. Faith, no, as yo may season it in the charge.
    Yo mst not pt another scandal on him,
    That he is open to incontinency.
    That's not my meaning. Bt breathe his falts so qaintly
    That they may seem the taints of liberty,
    The flash and otbreak of a fiery mind,
    A savageness in nreclaimed blood,
    Of general assalt.  
  Rey. Bt, my good lord-
  Pol. Wherefore shold yo do this?
  Rey. Ay, my lord,
    I wold know that.
  Pol. Marry, sir, here's my drift,
    And I believe it is a fetch of warrant.
    Yo laying these slight sllies on my son
    As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,
    Mark yo,
    Yor party in converse, him yo wold sond,
    Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
    The yoth yo breathe of gilty, be assr'd
    He closes with yo in this conseqence:
    'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman'-
    According to the phrase or the addition
    Of man and contry-
  Rey. Very good, my lord.
  Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I abot to say?
    By the mass, I was abot to say something! Where did I leave?
  Rey. At 'closes in the conseqence,' at 'friend or so,' and  
    gentleman.'
  Pol. At 'closes in the conseqence'- Ay, marry!
    He closes ths: 'I know the gentleman.
    I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
    Or then, or then, with sch or sch; and, as yo say,
    There was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rose;
    There falling ot at tennis'; or perchance,
    'I saw him enter sch a hose of sale,'
    Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
    See yo now-
    Yor bait of falsehood takes this carp of trth;
    And ths do we of wisdom and of reach,
    With windlasses and with assays of bias,
    By indirections find directions ot.
    So, by my former lectre and advice,
    Shall yo my son. Yo have me, have yo not
  Rey. My lord, I have.
  Pol. God b' wi' ye, fare ye well!
  Rey. Good my lord!                                    [Going.]
  Pol. Observe his inclination in yorself.  
  Rey. I shall, my lord.
  Pol. And let him ply his msic.
  Rey. Well, my lord.
  Pol. Farewell!
                                                  Exit Reynaldo.

                       Enter Ophelia.

    How now, Ophelia? What's the matter?
  Oph. O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
  Pol. With what, i' th' name of God I
  Oph. My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
    Lord Hamlet, with his doblet all nbrac'd,
    No hat pon his head, his stockings fol'd,
    Ungart'red, and down-gyved to his ankle;
    Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
    And with a look so piteos in prport
    As if he had been loosed ot of hell
    To speak of horrors- he comes before me.
  Pol. Mad for thy love?  
  Oph. My lord, I do not know,
    Bt trly I do fear it.
  Pol. What said he?
  Oph. He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
    Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
    And, with his other hand ths o'er his brow,
    He falls to sch persal of my face
    As he wold draw it. Long stay'd he so.
    At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
    And thrice his head ths waving p and down,
    He rais'd a sigh so piteos and profond
    As it did seem to shatter all his blk
    And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
    And with his head over his sholder trn'd
    He seem'd to find his way withot his eyes,
    For ot o' doors he went withot their help
    And to the last bended their light on me.
  Pol. Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
    This is the very ecstasy of love,
    Whose violent property fordoes itself  
    And leads the will to desperate ndertakings
    As oft as any passion nder heaven
    That does afflict or natres. I am sorry.
    What, have yo given him any hard words of late?
  Oph. No, my good lord; bt, as yo did command,
    I did repel his letters and denied
    His access to me.
  Pol. That hath made him mad.
    I am sorry that with better heed and jdgment
    I had not qoted him. I fear'd he did bt trifle
    And meant to wrack thee; bt beshrew my jealosy!
    By heaven, it is as proper to or age
    To cast beyond orselves in or opinions
    As it is common for the yonger sort
    To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
    This mst be known; which, being kept close, might move
    More grief to hide than hate to tter love.
    Come.
                                                         Exent.

Scene II.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.

Florish. [Enter King and Qeen, Rosencrantz and Gildenstern, cm aliis.

  King. Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Gildenstern.
    Moreover that we mch did long to see yo,
    The need we have to se yo did provoke
    Or hasty sending. Something have yo heard
    Of Hamlet's transformation. So I call it,
    Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
    Resembles that it was. What it shold be,
    More than his father's death, that ths hath pt him
    So mch from th' nderstanding of himself,
    I cannot dream of. I entreat yo both
    That, being of so yong clays broght p with him,
    And since so neighbor'd to his yoth and havior,
    That yo vochsafe yor rest here in or cort
    Some little time; so by yor companies
    To draw him on to pleasres, and to gather
    So mch as from occasion yo may glean,  
    Whether aght to s nknown afflicts him ths
    That, open'd, lies within or remedy.
  Qeen. Good gentlemen, he hath mch talk'd of yo,
    And sre I am two men there are not living
    To whom he more adheres. If it will please yo
    To show s so mch gentry and good will
    As to expend yor time with s awhile
    For the spply and profit of or hope,
    Yor visitation shall receive sch thanks
    As fits a king's remembrance.
  Ros. Both yor Majesties
    Might, by the sovereign power yo have of s,
    Pt yor dread pleasres more into command
    Than to entreaty.
  Gil. Bt we both obey,
    And here give p orselves, in the fll bent,
    To lay or service freely at yor feet,
    To be commanded.
  King. Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Gildenstern.
  Qeen. Thanks, Gildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.  
    And I beseech yo instantly to visit
    My too mch changed son.- Go, some of yo,
    And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
  Gil. Heavens make or presence and or practices
    Pleasant and helpfl to him!
  Qeen. Ay, amen!
                 Exent Rosencrantz and Gildenstern, [with some
                                                    Attendants].

                         Enter Polonis.

  Pol. Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
    Are joyflly retrn'd.
  King. Tho still hast been the father of good news.
  Pol. Have I, my lord? Assre yo, my good liege,
    I hold my dty as I hold my sol,
    Both to my God and to my gracios king;
    And I do think- or else this brain of mine
    Hnts not the trail of policy so sre
    As it hath s'd to do- that I have fond  
    The very case of Hamlet's lnacy.
  King. O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
  Pol. Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
    My news shall be the frit to that great feast.
  King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
                                                [Exit Polonis.]
    He tells me, my dear Gertrde, he hath fond
    The head and sorce of all yor son's distemper.
  Qeen. I dobt it is no other bt the main,
    His father's death and or o'erhasty marriage.
  King. Well, we shall sift him.

              Enter Polonis, Voltemand, and Cornelis.

    Welcome, my good friends.
    Say, Voltemand, what from or brother Norway?
  Volt. Most fair retrn of greetings and desires.
    Upon or first, he sent ot to sppress
    His nephew's levies; which to him appear'd
    To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,  
    Bt better look'd into, he trly fond
    It was against yor Highness; whereat griev'd,
    That so his sickness, age, and impotence
    Was falsely borne in hand, sends ot arrests
    On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
    Receives rebke from Norway, and, in fine,
    Makes vow before his ncle never more
    To give th' assay of arms against yor Majesty.
    Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
    Gives him three thosand crowns in annal fee
    And his commission to employ those soldiers,
    So levied as before, against the Polack;
    With an entreaty, herein frther shown,
                                                [Gives a paper.]
    That it might please yo to give qiet pass
    Throgh yor dominions for this enterprise,
    On sch regards of safety and allowance
    As therein are set down.
  King. It likes s well;
    And at or more consider'd time we'll read,  
    Answer, and think pon this bsiness.
    Meantime we thank yo for yor well-took labor.
    Go to yor rest; at night we'll feast together.
    Most welcome home!                       Exent Ambassadors.
  Pol. This bsiness is well ended.
    My liege, and madam, to expostlate
    What majesty shold be, what dty is,
    Why day is day, night is night, and time is time.
    Were nothing bt to waste night, day, and time.
    Therefore, since brevity is the sol of wit,
    And tediosness the limbs and otward florishes,
    I will be brief. Yor noble son is mad.
    Mad call I it; for, to define tre madness,
    What is't bt to be nothing else bt mad?
    Bt let that go.
  Qeen. More matter, with less art.
  Pol. Madam, I swear I se no art at all.
    That he is mad, 'tis tre: 'tis tre 'tis pity;
    And pity 'tis 'tis tre. A foolish figre!
    Bt farewell it, for I will se no art.  
    Mad let s grant him then. And now remains
    That we find ot the case of this effect-
    Or rather say, the case of this defect,
    For this effect defective comes by case.
    Ths it remains, and the remainder ths.
    Perpend.
    I have a daghter (have while she is mine),
    Who in her dty and obedience, mark,
    Hath given me this. Now gather, and srmise.
                                             [Reads] the letter.
    'To the celestial, and my sol's idol, the most beatified
      Ophelia,'-

    That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beatified' is a vile
      phrase.
    Bt yo shall hear. Ths:
                                                        [Reads.]
    'In her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'
  Qeen. Came this from Hamlet to her?
  Pol. Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithfl.     [Reads.]  

          'Dobt tho the stars are fire;
            Dobt that the sn doth move;
          Dobt trth to be a liar;
            Bt never dobt I love.
      'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these nmbers; I have not art to
    reckon my groans; bt that I love thee best, O most best, believe
    it. Adie.
      'Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
                                                          HAMLET.'

    This, in obedience, hath my daghter shown me;
    And more above, hath his solicitings,
    As they fell ot by time, by means, and place,
    All given to mine ear.
  King. Bt how hath she
    Receiv'd his love?
  Pol. What do yo think of me?
  King. As of a man faithfl and honorable.
  Pol. I wold fain prove so. Bt what might yo think,  
    When I had seen this hot love on the wing
    (As I perceiv'd it, I mst tell yo that,
    Before my daghter told me), what might yo,
    Or my dear Majesty yor qeen here, think,
    If I had play'd the desk or table book,
    Or given my heart a winking, mte and dmb,
    Or look'd pon this love with idle sight?
    What might yo think? No, I went rond to work
    And my yong mistress ths I did bespeak:
    'Lord Hamlet is a prince, ot of thy star.
    This mst not be.' And then I prescripts gave her,
    That she shold lock herself from his resort,
    Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
    Which done, she took the frits of my advice,
    And he, replsed, a short tale to make,
    Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
    Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
    Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
    Into the madness wherein now he raves,
    And all we morn for.  
  King. Do yo think 'tis this?
  Qeen. it may be, very like.
  Pol. Hath there been sch a time- I wold fain know that-
    That I have Positively said ''Tis so,'
    When it prov'd otherwise.?
  King. Not that I know.
  Pol. [points to his head and sholder] Take this from this, if this
      be otherwise.
    If circmstances lead me, I will find
    Where trth is hid, thogh it were hid indeed
    Within the centre.
  King. How may we try it frther?
  Pol. Yo know sometimes he walks for hors together
    Here in the lobby.
  Qeen. So he does indeed.
  Pol. At sch a time I'll loose my daghter to him.
    Be yo and I behind an arras then.
    Mark the enconter. If he love her not,
    And he not from his reason fall'n thereon
    Let me be no assistant for a state,  
    Bt keep a farm and carters.
  King. We will try it.

                 Enter Hamlet, reading on a book.

  Qeen. Bt look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
  Pol. Away, I do beseech yo, both away
    I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
                       Exent King and Qeen, [with Attendants].
    How does my good Lord Hamlet?
  Ham. Well, God-a-mercy.
  Pol. Do yo know me, my lord?
  Ham. Excellent well. Yo are a fishmonger.
  Pol. Not I, my lord.
  Ham. Then I wold yo were so honest a man.
  Pol. Honest, my lord?
  Ham. Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
    pick'd ot of ten thosand.
  Pol. That's very tre, my lord.
  Ham. For if the sn breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god  
    kissing carrion- Have yo a daghter?
  Pol. I have, my lord.
  Ham. Let her not walk i' th' sn. Conception is a blessing, bt not
    as yor daghter may conceive. Friend, look to't.
  Pol. [aside] How say yo by that? Still harping on my daghter. Yet
    he knew me not at first. He said I was a fishmonger. He is far
    gone, far gone! And trly in my yoth I sff'red mch extremity
    for love- very near this. I'll speak to him again.- What do yo
    read, my lord?
  Ham. Words, words, words.
  Pol. What is the matter, my lord?
  Ham. Between who?
  Pol. I mean, the matter that yo read, my lord.
  Ham. Slanders, sir; for the satirical roge says here that old men
    have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes
    prging thick amber and plm-tree gm; and that they have a
    plentifl lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,
    sir, thogh I most powerflly and potently believe, yet I hold it
    not honesty to have it ths set down; for yo yorself, sir,
    shold be old as I am if, like a crab, yo cold go backward.  
  Pol. [aside] Thogh this be madness, yet there is a method in't.-
   Will Yo walk ot of the air, my lord?
  Ham. Into my grave?
  Pol. Indeed, that is ot o' th' air. [Aside] How pregnant sometimes
    his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which
    reason and sanity cold not so prosperosly be delivered of. I
    will leave him and sddenly contrive the means of meeting between
    him and my daghter.- My honorable lord, I will most hmbly take
    my leave of yo.
  Ham. Yo cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more
    willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my
    life,

                    Enter Rosencrantz and Gildenstern.

  Pol. Fare yo well, my lord.
  Ham. These tedios old fools!
  Pol. Yo go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
  Ros. [to Polonis] God save yo, sir!
                                                Exit [Polonis].  
  Gil. My honor'd lord!
  Ros. My most dear lord!
  Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost tho, Gildenstern? Ah,
    Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?
  Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.
  Gil. Happy in that we are not over-happy.
    On Fortne's cap we are not the very btton.
  Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe?
  Ros. Neither, my lord.
  Ham. Then yo live abot her waist, or in the middle of her
    favors?
  Gil. Faith, her privates we.
  Ham. In the secret parts of Fortne? O! most tre! she is a
    strmpet. What news ?
  Ros. None, my lord, bt that the world's grown honest.
  Ham. Then is doomsday near! Bt yor news is not tre. Let me
    qestion more in particlar. What have yo, my good friends,
    deserved at the hands of Fortne that she sends yo to prison
    hither?
  Gil. Prison, my lord?  
  Ham. Denmark's a prison.
  Ros. Then is the world one.
  Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
    dngeons, Denmark being one o' th' worst.
  Ros. We think not so, my lord.
  Ham. Why, then 'tis none to yo; for there is nothing either good
    or bad bt thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.
  Ros. Why, then yor ambition makes it one. 'Tis too narrow for yor
    mind.
  Ham. O God, I cold be bonded in a ntshell and cont myself a
    king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.
  Gil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very sbstance of
    the ambitios is merely the shadow of a dream.
  Ham. A dream itself is bt a shadow.
  Ros. Trly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a qality that
    it is bt a shadow's shadow.
  Ham. Then are or beggars bodies, and or monarchs and otstretch'd
    heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to th' cort? for, by my
    fay, I cannot reason.
  Both. We'll wait pon yo.  
  Ham. No sch matter! I will not sort yo with the rest of my
    servants; for, to speak to yo like an honest man, I am most
    dreadflly attended. Bt in the beaten way of friendship, what
    make yo at Elsinore?
  Ros. To visit yo, my lord; no other occasion.
  Ham. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; bt I thank yo;
    and sre, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were
    yo not sent for? Is it yor own inclining? Is it a free
    visitation? Come, deal jstly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.
  Gil. What shold we say, my lord?
  Ham. Why, anything- bt to th' prpose. Yo were sent for; and
    there is a kind of confession in yor looks, which yor modesties
    have not craft enogh to color. I know the good King and Qeen
    have sent for yo.
  Ros. To what end, my lord?
  Ham. That yo mst teach me. Bt let me conjre yo by the rights
    of or fellowship, by the consonancy of or yoth, by the
    obligation of or ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a
    better proposer cold charge yo withal, be even and direct with
    me, whether yo were sent for or no.  
  Ros. [aside to Gildenstern] What say yo?
  Ham. [aside] Nay then, I have an eye of yo.- If yo love me, hold
    not off.
  Gil. My lord, we were sent for.
  Ham. I will tell yo why. So shall my anticipation prevent yor
    discovery, and yor secrecy to the King and Qeen molt no
    feather. I have of late- bt wherefore I know not- lost all my
    mirth, forgone all cstom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so
    heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,
    seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the
    air, look yo, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical
    roof fretted with golden fire- why, it appeareth no other thing
    to me than a fol and pestilent congregation of vapors. What a
    piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in
    faclties! in form and moving how express and admirable! in
    action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the
    beaty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what
    is this qintessence of dst? Man delights not me- no, nor woman
    neither, thogh by yor smiling yo seem to say so.
  Ros. My lord, there was no sch stff in my thoghts.  
  Ham. Why did yo lagh then, when I said 'Man delights not me'?
  Ros. To think, my lord, if yo delight not in man, what lenten
    entertainment the players shall receive from yo. We coted them
    on the way, and hither are they coming to offer yo service.
  Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome- his Majesty shall
    have tribte of me; the adventros knight shall se his foil and
    target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the hmoros man shall
    end his part in peace; the clown shall make those lagh whose
    lngs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind
    freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are
    they?
  Ros. Even those yo were wont to take sch delight in, the
    tragedians of the city.
  Ham. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
    reptation and profit, was better both ways.
  Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
    innovation.
  Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the
    city? Are they so follow'd?
  Ros. No indeed are they not.  
  Ham. How comes it? Do they grow rsty?
  Ros. Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted pace; bt there is,
    sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry ot on the top
    of qestion and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort. These are now
    the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
    them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of gooseqills and
    dare scarce come thither.
  Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they
    escoted? Will they prse the qality no longer than they can
    sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they shold grow
    themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means
    are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim
    against their own sccession.
  Ros. Faith, there has been mch to do on both sides; and the nation
    holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a
    while, no money bid for argment nless the poet and the player
    went to cffs in the qestion.
  Ham. Is't possible?
  Gil. O, there has been mch throwing abot of brains.
  Ham. Do the boys carry it away?  
  Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- Hercles and his load too.
  Ham. It is not very strange; for my ncle is King of Denmark, and
    those that wold make mows at him while my father lived give
    twenty, forty, fifty, a hndred dcats apiece for his pictre in
    little. 'Sblood, there is something in this more than natral, if
    philosophy cold find it ot.

                     Florish for the Players.

  Gil. There are the players.
  Ham. Gentlemen, yo are welcome to Elsinore. Yor hands, come! Th'
    apprtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
    with yo in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which I
    tell yo mst show fairly otwards) shold more appear like
    entertainment than yors. Yo are welcome. Bt my ncle-father
    and ant-mother are deceiv'd.
  Gil. In what, my dear lord?
  Ham. I am bt mad north-north-west. When the wind is sotherly I
    know a hawk from a handsaw.
  
                            Enter Polonis.

  Pol. Well be with yo, gentlemen!
  Ham. Hark yo, Gildenstern- and yo too- at each ear a hearer!
    That great baby yo see there is not yet ot of his swaddling
    clots.
  Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
    man is twice a child.
  Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.-
   Yo say right, sir; a Monday morning; twas so indeed.
  Pol. My lord, I have news to tell yo.
  Ham. My lord, I have news to tell yo. When Roscis was an actor in
    Rome-
  Pol. The actors are come hither, my lord.
  Ham. Bzz, bzz!
  Pol. Upon my honor-
  Ham. Then came each actor on his ass-
  Pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
    history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
    tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene  
    individable, or poem nlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
    Plats too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are
    the only men.
  Ham. O Jephthah, jdge of Israel, what a treasre hadst tho!
  Pol. What treasre had he, my lord?
  Ham. Why,

         'One fair daghter, and no more,
           The which he loved passing well.'

  Pol. [aside] Still on my daghter.
  Ham. Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?
  Pol. If yo call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daghter that I
    love passing well.
  Ham. Nay, that follows not.
  Pol. What follows then, my lord?
  Ham. Why,

           'As by lot, God wot,'

 and then, yo know,
  
           'It came to pass, as most like it was.'

    The first row of the pios chanson will show yo more; for look
    where my abridgment comes.

                     Enter for or five Players.

    Yo are welcome, masters; welcome, all.- I am glad to see thee
    well.- Welcome, good friends.- O, my old friend? Why, thy face is
    valanc'd since I saw thee last. Com'st' tho to' beard me in
    Denmark?- What, my yong lady and mistress? By'r Lady, yor
    ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw yo last by the
    altitde of a chopine. Pray God yor voice, like a piece of
    ncrrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring.- Masters, yo are
    all welcome. We'll e'en to't like French falconers, fly at
    anything we see. We'll have a speech straight. Come, give s a
    taste of yor qality. Come, a passionate speech.
  1. Play. What speech, my good lord?
  Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, bt it was never acted;
    or if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleas'd  
    not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; bt it was (as I
    receiv'd it, and others, whose jdgments in sch matters cried in
    the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
    set down with as mch modesty as cnning. I remember one said
    there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savory,
    nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the athor of
    affectation; bt call'd it an honest method, as wholesome as
    sweet, and by very mch more handsome than fine. One speech in't
    I chiefly lov'd. 'Twas AEneas' tale to Dido, and thereabot of it
    especially where he speaks of Priam's slaghter. If it live in
    yor memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:

         'The rgged Pyrrhs, like th' Hyrcanian beast-'

    'Tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhs:

         'The rgged Pyrrhs, he whose sable arms,
         Black as his prpose, did the night resemble
         When he lay coched in the ominos horse,
         Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd  
         With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot
         Now is be total gles, horridly trick'd
         With blood of fathers, mothers, daghters, sons,
         Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
         That lend a tyrannos and a damned light
         To their lord's mrther. Roasted in wrath and fire,
         And ths o'ersized with coaglate gore,
         With eyes like carbncles, the hellish Pyrrhs
         Old grandsire Priam seeks.'

    So, proceed yo.
  Pol. Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
     discretion.

  1. Play. 'Anon he finds him,
      Striking too short at Greeks. His antiqe sword,
      Rebellios to his arm, lies where it falls,
      Repgnant to command. Uneqal match'd,
      Pyrrhs at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
      Bt with the whiff and wind of his fell sword  
      Th' nnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilim,
      Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
      Stoops to his base, and with a hideos crash
      Takes prisoner Pyrrhs' ear. For lo! his sword,
      Which was declining on the milky head
      Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' th' air to stick.
      So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhs stood,
      And, like a netral to his will and matter,
      Did nothing.
      Bt, as we often see, against some storm,
      A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
      The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
      As hsh as death- anon the dreadfl thnder
      Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhs' pase,
      Arosed vengeance sets him new awork;
      And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
      On Mars's armor, forg'd for proof eterne,
      With less remorse than Pyrrhs' bleeding sword
      Now falls on Priam.
      Ot, ot, tho strmpet Fortne! All yo gods,  
      In general synod take away her power;
      Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
      And bowl the rond nave down the hill of heaven,
      As low as to the fiends!

  Pol. This is too long.
  Ham. It shall to the barber's, with yor beard.- Prithee say on.
    He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to
    Hecba.

  1. Play. 'Bt who, O who, had seen the mobled qeen-'

  Ham. 'The mobled qeen'?
  Pol. That's good! 'Mobled qeen' is good.

  1. Play. 'Rn barefoot p and down, threat'ning the flames
      With bisson rhem; a clot pon that head
      Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
      Abot her lank and all o'erteemed loins,
      A blanket, in the alarm of fear caght p-  
      Who this had seen, with tonge in venom steep'd
      'Gainst Fortne's state wold treason have prononc'd.
      Bt if the gods themselves did see her then,
      When she saw Pyrrhs make malicios sport
      In Mincing with his sword her hsband's limbs,
      The instant brst of clamor that she made
      (Unless things mortal move them not at all)
      Wold have made milch the brning eyes of heaven
      And passion in the gods.'

  Pol. Look, whe'r he has not trn'd his color, and has tears in's
    eyes. Prithee no more!
  Ham. 'Tis well. I'll have thee speak ot the rest of this soon.-
    Good my lord, will yo see the players well bestow'd? Do yo
    hear? Let them be well s'd; for they are the abstract and brief
    chronicles of the time. After yor death yo were better have a
    bad epitaph than their ill report while yo live.
  Pol. My lord, I will se them according to their desert.
  Ham. God's bodykins, man, mch better! Use every man after his
    desert, and who shold scape whipping? Use them after yor own  
    honor and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
    yor bonty. Take them in.
  Pol. Come, sirs.
  Ham. Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play to-morrow.
                 Exent Polonis and Players [except the First].
    Dost tho hear me, old friend? Can yo play 'The Mrther of
    Gonzago'?
  1. Play. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. Yo cold, for a need, stdy a
    speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I wold set down and
    insert in't, cold yo not?
  1. Play. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. Very well. Follow that lord- and look yo mock him not.
                                            [Exit First Player.]
    My good friends, I'll leave yo till night. Yo are welcome to
    Elsinore.
  Ros. Good my lord!
  Ham. Ay, so, God b' wi' ye!
                            [Exent Rosencrantz and Gildenstern
    Now I am alone.  
    O what a roge and peasant slave am I!
    Is it not monstros that this player here,
    Bt in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
    Cold force his sol so to his own conceit
    That, from her working, all his visage wann'd,
    Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
    A broken voice, and his whole fnction siting
    With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!
    For Hecba!
    What's Hecba to him, or he to Hecba,
    That he shold weep for her? What wold he do,
    Had he the motive and the ce for passion
    That I have? He wold drown the stage with tears
    And cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
    Make mad the gilty and appal the free,
    Confond the ignorant, and amaze indeed
    The very faclties of eyes and ears.
    Yet I,
    A dll and mddy-mettled rascal, peak
    Like John-a-dreams, npregnant of my case,  
    And can say nothing! No, not for a king,
    Upon whose property and most dear life
    A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward?
    Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?
    Plcks off my beard and blows it in my face?
    Tweaks me by th' nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
    As deep as to the lngs? Who does me this, ha?
    'Swonds, I shold take it! for it cannot be
    Bt I am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
    To make oppression bitter, or ere this
    I shold have fatted all the region kites
    With this slave's offal. Bloody bawdy villain!
    Remorseless, treacheros, lecheros, kindless villain!
    O, vengeance!
    Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
    That I, the son of a dear father mrther'd,
    Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
    Mst (like a whore) npack my heart with words
    And fall a-crsing like a very drab,
    A scllion!  
    Fie pon't! foh! Abot, my brain! Hm, I have heard
    That gilty creatres, sitting at a play,
    Have by the very cnning of the scene
    Been strck so to the sol that presently
    They have proclaim'd their malefactions;
    For mrther, thogh it have no tonge, will speak
    With most miraclos organ, I'll have these Players
    Play something like the mrther of my father
    Before mine ncle. I'll observe his looks;
    I'll tent him to the qick. If he bt blench,
    I know my corse. The spirit that I have seen
    May be a devil; and the devil hath power
    T' assme a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
    Ot of my weakness and my melancholy,
    As he is very potent with sch spirits,
    Abses me to damn me. I'll have gronds
    More relative than this. The play's the thing
    Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.         Exit.





ACT III. Scene I.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.

Enter King, Qeen, Polonis, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Gildenstern, and Lords.

  King. And can yo by no drift of circmstance
    Get from him why he pts on this confsion,
    Grating so harshly all his days of qiet
    With trblent and dangeros lnacy?
  Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted,
    Bt from what case he will by no means speak.
  Gil. Nor do we find him forward to be sonded,
    Bt with a crafty madness keeps aloof
    When we wold bring him on to some confession
    Of his tre state.
  Qeen. Did he receive yo well?
  Ros. Most like a gentleman.
  Gil. Bt with mch forcing of his disposition.
  Ros. Niggard of qestion, bt of or demands
    Most free in his reply.
  Qeen. Did yo assay him  
    To any pastime?
  Ros. Madam, it so fell ot that certain players
    We o'erraght on the way. Of these we told him,
    And there did seem in him a kind of joy
    To hear of it. They are here abot the cort,
    And, as I think, they have already order
    This night to play before him.
  Pol. 'Tis most tre;
    And he beseech'd me to entreat yor Majesties
    To hear and see the matter.
  King. With all my heart, and it doth mch content me
    To hear him so inclin'd.
    Good gentlemen, give him a frther edge
    And drive his prpose on to these delights.
  Ros. We shall, my lord.
                            Exent Rosencrantz and Gildenstern.
  King. Sweet Gertrde, leave s too;
    For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
    That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
    Affront Ophelia.  
    Her father and myself (lawfl espials)
    Will so bestow orselves that, seeing nseen,
    We may of their enconter frankly jdge
    And gather by him, as he is behav'd,
    If't be th' affliction of his love, or no,
    That ths he sffers for.
  Qeen. I shall obey yo;
    And for yor part, Ophelia, I do wish
    That yor good beaties be the happy case
    Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope yor virtes
    Will bring him to his wonted way again,
    To both yor honors.
  Oph. Madam, I wish it may.
                                                   [Exit Qeen.]
  Pol. Ophelia, walk yo here.- Gracios, so please yo,
    We will bestow orselves.- [To Ophelia] Read on this book,
    That show of sch an exercise may color
    Yor loneliness.- We are oft to blame in this,
    'Tis too mch prov'd, that with devotion's visage
    And pios action we do sgar o'er  
    The Devil himself.
  King. [aside] O, 'tis too tre!
    How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
    The harlot's cheek, beatied with plast'ring art,
    Is not more gly to the thing that helps it
    Than is my deed to my most painted word.
    O heavy brthen!
  Pol. I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
                                      Exent King and Polonis].

                           Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. To be, or not to be- that is the qestion:
    Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to sffer
    The slings and arrows of otrageos fortne
    Or to take arms against a sea of trobles,
    And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-
    No more; and by a sleep to say we end
    The heartache, and the thosand natral shocks
    That flesh is heir to. 'Tis a consmmation  
    Devotly to be wish'd. To die- to sleep.
    To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rb!
    For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
    When we have shffled off this mortal coil,
    Mst give s pase. There's the respect
    That makes calamity of so long life.
    For who wold bear the whips and scorns of time,
    Th' oppressor's wrong, the prod man's contmely,
    The pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,
    The insolence of office, and the sprns
    That patient merit of th' nworthy takes,
    When he himself might his qiets make
    With a bare bodkin? Who wold these fardels bear,
    To grnt and sweat nder a weary life,
    Bt that the dread of something after death-
    The ndiscover'd contry, from whose born
    No traveller retrns- pzzles the will,
    And makes s rather bear those ills we have
    Than fly to others that we know not of?
    Ths conscience does make cowards of s all,  
    And ths the native he of resoltion
    Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thoght,
    And enterprises of great pith and moment
    With this regard their crrents trn awry
    And lose the name of action.- Soft yo now!
    The fair Ophelia!- Nymph, in thy orisons
    Be all my sins rememb'red.
  Oph. Good my lord,
    How does yor honor for this many a day?
  Ham. I hmbly thank yo; well, well, well.
  Oph. My lord, I have remembrances of yors
    That I have longed long to re-deliver.
    I pray yo, now receive them.
  Ham. No, not I!
    I never gave yo aght.
  Oph. My honor'd lord, yo know right well yo did,
    And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd
    As made the things more rich. Their perfme lost,
    Take these again; for to the noble mind
    Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove nkind.  
    There, my lord.
  Ham. Ha, ha! Are yo honest?
  Oph. My lord?
  Ham. Are yo fair?
  Oph. What means yor lordship?
  Ham. That if yo be honest and fair, yor honesty shold admit no
    discorse to yor beaty.
  Oph. Cold beaty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
  Ham. Ay, trly; for the power of beaty will sooner transform
    honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
    translate beaty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox,
    bt now the time gives it proof. I did love yo once.
  Oph. Indeed, my lord, yo made me believe so.
  Ham. Yo shold not have believ'd me; for virte cannot so
    inoclate or old stock bt we shall relish of it. I loved yo
    not.
  Oph. I was the more deceived.
  Ham. Get thee to a nnnery! Why woldst tho be a breeder of
    sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, bt yet I cold accse
    me of sch things that it were better my mother had not borne me.  
    I am very prod, revengefl, ambitios; with more offences at my
    beck than I have thoghts to pt them in, imagination to give
    them shape, or time to act them in. What shold sch fellows as I
    do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all;
    believe none of s. Go thy ways to a nnnery. Where's yor
    father?
  Oph. At home, my lord.
  Ham. Let the doors be sht pon him, that he may play the fool
    nowhere bt in's own hose. Farewell.
  Oph. O, help him, yo sweet heavens!
  Ham. If tho dost marry, I'll give thee this plage for thy dowry:
    be tho as chaste as ice, as pre as snow, tho shalt not escape
    calmny. Get thee to a nnnery. Go, farewell. Or if tho wilt
    needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enogh what
    monsters yo make of them. To a nnnery, go; and qickly too.
    Farewell.
  Oph. O heavenly powers, restore him!
  Ham. I have heard of yor paintings too, well enogh. God hath
    given yo one face, and yo make yorselves another. Yo jig, yo
    amble, and yo lisp; yo nickname God's creatres and make yor  
    wantonness yor ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on't! it hath made
    me mad. I say, we will have no moe marriages. Those that are
    married already- all bt one- shall live; the rest shall keep as
    they are. To a nnnery, go.                            Exit.
  Oph. O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
    The cortier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tonge, sword,
    Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
    The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
    Th' observ'd of all observers- qite, qite down!
    And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
    That sck'd the honey of his msic vows,
    Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
    Like sweet bells jangled, ot of tne and harsh;
    That nmatch'd form and featre of blown yoth
    Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
    T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

                   Enter King and Polonis.

  King. Love? his affections do not that way tend;  
    Nor what he spake, thogh it lack'd form a little,
    Was not like madness. There's something in his sol
    O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
    And I do dobt the hatch and the disclose
    Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
    I have in qick determination
    Ths set it down: he shall with speed to England
    For the demand of or neglected tribte.
    Haply the seas, and contries different,
    With variable objects, shall expel
    This something-settled matter in his heart,
    Whereon his brains still beating pts him ths
    From fashion of himself. What think yo on't?
  Pol. It shall do well. Bt yet do I believe
    The origin and commencement of his grief
    Sprng from neglected love.- How now, Ophelia?
    Yo need not tell s what Lord Hamlet said.
    We heard it all.- My lord, do as yo please;
    Bt if yo hold it fit, after the play
    Let his qeen mother all alone entreat him  
    To show his grief. Let her be rond with him;
    And I'll be plac'd so please yo, in the ear
    Of all their conference. If she find him not,
    To England send him; or confine him where
    Yor wisdom best shall think.
  King. It shall be so.
    Madness in great ones mst not nwatch'd go.         Exent.




Scene II.
Elsinore. hall in the Castle.

Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.

  Ham. Speak the speech, I pray yo, as I prononc'd it to yo,
    trippingly on the tonge. Bt if yo moth it, as many of or
    players do, I had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do
    not saw the air too mch with yor hand, ths, bt se all
    gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say)
    whirlwind of yor passion, yo mst acqire and beget a
    temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the
    sol to hear a robstios periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to
    tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the grondlings, who
    (for the most part) are capable of nothing bt inexplicable dmb
    shows and noise. I wold have sch a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing
    Termagant. It ot-herods Herod. Pray yo avoid it.
  Player. I warrant yor honor.
  Ham. Be not too tame neither; bt let yor own discretion be yor
    ttor. Sit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
    this special observance, that yo o'erstep not the modesty of
    natre: for anything so overdone is from the prpose of playing,  
    whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
    'twere, the mirror p to natre; to show Virte her own featre,
    scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his
    form and pressre. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, thogh
    it make the nskilfl lagh, cannot bt make the jdicios
    grieve; the censre of the which one mst in yor allowance
    o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I
    have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
    speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
    Christians, nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
    strtted and bellowed that I have thoght some of Natre's
    jorneymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
    hmanity so abominably.
  Player. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with s, sir.
  Ham. O, reform it altogether! And let those that play yor clowns
    speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them
    that will themselves lagh, to set on some qantity of barren
    spectators to lagh too, thogh in the mean time some necessary
    qestion of the play be then to be considered. That's villanos
    and shows a most pitifl ambition in the fool that ses it. Go  
    make yo ready.
                                                 Exent Players.

            Enter Polonis, Rosencrantz, and Gildenstern.

    How now, my lord? Will the King hear this piece of work?
  Pol. And the Qeen too, and that presently.
  Ham. Bid the players make haste, [Exit Polonis.] Will yo two
    help to hasten them?
  Both. We will, my lord.                       Exent they two.
  Ham. What, ho, Horatio!

                      Enter Horatio.

  Hor. Here, sweet lord, at yor service.
  Ham. Horatio, tho art e'en as jst a man
    As e'er my conversation cop'd withal.
  Hor. O, my dear lord!
  Ham. Nay, do not think I flatter;
    For what advancement may I hope from thee,  
    That no revene hast bt thy good spirits
    To feed and clothe thee? Why shold the poor be flatter'd?
    No, let the candied tonge lick absrd pomp,
    And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
    Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost tho hear?
    Since my dear sol was mistress of her choice
    And cold of men distingish, her election
    Hath scald thee for herself. For tho hast been
    As one, in sff'ring all, that sffers nothing;
    A man that Fortne's bffets and rewards
    Hast ta'en with eqal thanks; and blest are those
    Whose blood and jdgment are so well commingled
    That they are not a pipe for Fortne's finger
    To sond what stop she please. Give me that man
    That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
    In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
    As I do thee. Something too mch of this I
    There is a play to-night before the King.
    One scene of it comes near the circmstance,
    Which I have told thee, of my father's death.  
    I prithee, when tho seest that act afoot,
    Even with the very comment of thy sol
    Observe my ncle. If his occlted gilt
    Do not itself nkennel in one speech,
    It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
    And my imaginations are as fol
    As Vlcan's stithy. Give him heedfl note;
    For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
    And after we will both or jdgments join
    In censre of his seeming.
  Hor. Well, my lord.
    If he steal aght the whilst this play is playing,
    And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.

    Sond a florish. [Enter Trmpets and Kettledrms. Danish
    march. [Enter King, Qeen, Polonis, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
      Gildenstern, and other Lords attendant, with the Gard
                       carrying torches.

  Ham. They are coming to the play. I mst be idle.  
    Get yo a place.
  King. How fares or cosin Hamlet?
  Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,
    promise-cramm'd. Yo cannot feed capons so.
  King. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These words are not
    mine.
  Ham. No, nor mine now. [To Polonis] My lord, yo play'd once
    i' th' niversity, yo say?
  Pol. That did I, my lord, and was acconted a good actor.
  Ham. What did yo enact?
  Pol. I did enact Jlis Caesar; I was kill'd i' th' Capitol; Brts
    kill'd me.
  Ham. It was a brte part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
    the players ready.
  Ros. Ay, my lord. They stay pon yor patience.
  Qeen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
  Ham. No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.
  Pol. [to the King] O, ho! do yo mark that?
  Ham. Lady, shall I lie in yor lap?
                                  [Sits down at Ophelia's feet.]  
  Oph. No, my lord.
  Ham. I mean, my head pon yor lap?
  Oph. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. Do yo think I meant contry matters?
  Oph. I think nothing, my lord.
  Ham. That's a fair thoght to lie between maids' legs.
  Oph. What is, my lord?
  Ham. Nothing.
  Oph. Yo are merry, my lord.
  Ham. Who, I?
  Oph. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. O God, yor only jig-maker! What shold a man do bt be merry?
    For look yo how cheerflly my mother looks, and my father died
    within 's two hors.
  Oph. Nay 'tis twice two months, my lord.
  Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a
    sit of sables. O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten
    yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may otlive his life
    half a year. Bt, by'r Lady, he mst bild chrches then; or else
    shall he sffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose  
    epitaph is 'For O, for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!'

               Hatboys play. The dmb show enters.

    Enter a King and a Qeen very lovingly; the Qeen embracing
    him and he her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation
    nto him. He takes her p, and declines his head pon her
    neck. He lays him down pon a bank of flowers. She, seeing
    him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
    crown, kisses it, pors poison in the sleeper's ears, and
    leaves him. The Qeen retrns, finds the King dead, and makes
    passionate action. The Poisoner with some three or for Mtes,
    comes in again, seem to condole with her. The dead body is
    carried away. The Poisoner wooes the Qeen with gifts; she
    seems harsh and nwilling awhile, bt in the end accepts
    his love.
                                                         Exent.

  Oph. What means this, my lord?
  Ham. Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.  
  Oph. Belike this show imports the argment of the play.

                      Enter Prologe.

  Ham. We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep consel;
    they'll tell all.
  Oph. Will he tell s what this show meant?
  Ham. Ay, or any show that yo'll show him. Be not yo asham'd to
    show, he'll not shame to tell yo what it means.
  Oph. Yo are naght, yo are naght! I'll mark the play.

    Pro. For s, and for or tragedy,
      Here stooping to yor clemency,
      We beg yor hearing patiently.                     [Exit.]

  Ham. Is this a prologe, or the posy of a ring?
  Oph. 'Tis brief, my lord.
  Ham. As woman's love.

              Enter [two Players as] King and Qeen.  

    King. Fll thirty times hath Phoebs' cart gone rond
      Neptne's salt wash and Tells' orbed grond,
      And thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen
      Abot the world have times twelve thirties been,
      Since love or hearts, and Hymen did or hands,
      Unite comtal in most sacred bands.
    Qeen. So many jorneys may the sn and moon
      Make s again cont o'er ere love be done!
      Bt woe is me! yo are so sick of late,
      So far from cheer and from yor former state.
      That I distrst yo. Yet, thogh I distrst,
      Discomfort yo, my lord, it nothing mst;
      For women's fear and love holds qantity,
      In neither aght, or in extremity.
      Now what my love is, proof hath made yo know;
      And as my love is siz'd, my fear is so.
      Where love is great, the littlest dobts are fear;
      Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
    King. Faith, I mst leave thee, love, and shortly too;  
      My operant powers their fnctions leave to do.
      And tho shalt live in this fair world behind,
      Honor'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind
      For hsband shalt tho-
    Qeen. O, confond the rest!
      Sch love mst needs be treason in my breast.
      When second hsband let me be accrst!
      None wed the second bt who killed the first.

  Ham. [aside] Wormwood, wormwood!

    Qeen. The instances that second marriage move
      Are base respects of thrift, bt none of love.
      A second time I kill my hsband dead
      When second hsband kisses me in bed.
    King. I do believe yo think what now yo speak;
      Bt what we do determine oft we break.
      Prpose is bt the slave to memory,
      Of violent birth, bt poor validity;
      Which now, like frit nripe, sticks on the tree,  
      Bt fill nshaken when they mellow be.
      Most necessary 'tis that we forget
      To pay orselves what to orselves is debt.
      What to orselves in passion we propose,
      The passion ending, doth the prpose lose.
      The violence of either grief or joy
      Their own enactres with themselves destroy.
      Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
      Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
      This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
      That even or loves shold with or fortnes change;
      For 'tis a qestion left s yet to prove,
      Whether love lead fortne, or else fortne love.
      The great man down, yo mark his favorite flies,
      The poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies;
      And hitherto doth love on fortne tend,
      For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
      And who in want a hollow friend doth try,
      Directly seasons him his enemy.
      Bt, orderly to end where I begn,  
      Or wills and fates do so contrary rn
      That or devices still are overthrown;
      Or thoghts are ors, their ends none of or own.
      So think tho wilt no second hsband wed;
      Bt die thy thoghts when thy first lord is dead.
    Qeen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
      Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
      To desperation trn my trst and hope,
      An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope,
      Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
      Meet what I wold have well, and it destroy,
      Both here and hence prse me lasting strife,
      If, once a widow, ever I be wife!

  Ham. If she shold break it now!

    King. 'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
      My spirits grow dll, and fain I wold begile
      The tedios day with sleep.
    Qeen. Sleep rock thy brain,  
                                                    [He] sleeps.
      And never come mischance between s twain!
Exit.

  Ham. Madam, how like yo this play?
  Qeen. The lady doth protest too mch, methinks.
  Ham. O, bt she'll keep her word.
  King. Have yo heard the argment? Is there no offence in't?
  Ham. No, no! They do bt jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'
    world.
  King. What do yo call the play?
  Ham. 'The Mosetrap.' Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the
    image of a mrther done in Vienna. Gonzago is the dke's name;
    his wife, Baptista. Yo shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of
    work; bt what o' that? Yor Majesty, and we that have free
    sols, it toches s not. Let the gall'd jade winch; or withers
    are nwrng.

                         Enter Lcians.
  
    This is one Lcians, nephew to the King.
  Oph. Yo are as good as a chors, my lord.
  Ham. I cold interpret between yo and yor love, if I cold see
    the pppets dallying.
  Oph. Yo are keen, my lord, yo are keen.
  Ham. It wold cost yo a groaning to take off my edge.
  Oph. Still better, and worse.
  Ham. So yo mst take yor hsbands.- Begin, mrtherer. Pox, leave
    thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth
    bellow for revenge.

    Lc. Thoghts black, hands apt, drgs fit, and time agreeing;
      Confederate season, else no creatre seeing;
      Tho mixtre rank, of midnight weeds collected,
      With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
      Thy natral magic and dire property
      On wholesome life srp immediately.
                                   Pors the poison in his ears.

  Ham. He poisons him i' th' garden for's estate. His name's Gonzago.  
    The story is extant, and written in very choice Italian. Yo
    shall see anon how the mrtherer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
  Oph. The King rises.
  Ham. What, frighted with false fire?
  Qeen. How fares my lord?
  Pol. Give o'er the play.
  King. Give me some light! Away!
  All. Lights, lights, lights!
                              Exent all bt Hamlet and Horatio.
  Ham.   Why, let the strcken deer go weep,
          The hart ngalled play;
         For some mst watch, while some mst sleep:
          Ths rns the world away.
    Wold not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
    fortnes trn Trk with me-with two Provincial roses on my raz'd
    shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
  Hor. Half a share.
  Ham.   A whole one I!
         For tho dost know, O Damon dear,
           This realm dismantled was  
         Of Jove himself; and now reigns here
           A very, very- pajock.
  Hor. Yo might have rhym'd.
  Ham. O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thosand
    pond! Didst perceive?
  Hor. Very well, my lord.
  Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning?
  Hor. I did very well note him.
  Ham.   Aha! Come, some msic! Come, the recorders!
         For if the King like not the comedy,
         Why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
    Come, some msic!

                Enter Rosencrantz and Gildenstern.

  Gil. Good my lord, vochsafe me a word with yo.
  Ham. Sir, a whole history.
  Gil. The King, sir-
  Ham. Ay, sir, what of him?
  Gil. Is in his retirement, marvellos distemper'd.  
  Ham. With drink, sir?
  Gil. No, my lord; rather with choler.
  Ham. Yor wisdom shold show itself more richer to signify this to
    the doctor; for me to pt him to his prgation wold perhaps
    plnge him into far more choler.
  Gil. Good my lord, pt yor discorse into some frame, and start
    not so wildly from my affair.
  Ham. I am tame, sir; prononce.
  Gil. The Qeen, yor mother, in most great affliction of spirit
    hath sent me to yo.
  Ham. Yo are welcome.
  Gil. Nay, good my lord, this cortesy is not of the right breed.
    If it shall please yo to make me a wholesome answer, I will do
    yor mother's commandment; if not, yor pardon and my retrn
    shall be the end of my bsiness.
  Ham. Sir, I cannot.
  Gil. What, my lord?
  Ham. Make yo a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd. Bt, sir, sch
    answer is I can make, yo shall command; or rather, as yo say,
    my mother. Therefore no more, bt to the matter! My mother, yo  
    say-
  Ros. Then ths she says: yor behavior hath strck her into
    amazement and admiration.
  Ham. O wonderfl son, that can so stonish a mother! Bt is there no
    seqel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.
  Ros. She desires to speak with yo in her closet ere yo go to bed.
  Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times or mother. Have yo any
    frther trade with s?
  Ros. My lord, yo once did love me.
  Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
  Ros. Good my lord, what is yor case of distemper? Yo do srely
    bar the door pon yor own liberty, if yo deny yor griefs to
    yor friend.
  Ham. Sir, I lack advancement.
  Ros. How can that be, when yo have the voice of the King himself
    for yor sccession in Denmark?
  Ham. Ay, sir, bt 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
    msty.

                     Enter the Players with recorders.  

    O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with yo- why do
    yo go abot to recover the wind of me, as if yo wold drive me
    into a toil?
  Gil. O my lord, if my dty be too bold, my love is too nmannerly.
  Ham. I do not well nderstand that. Will yo play pon this pipe?
  Gil. My lord, I cannot.
  Ham. I pray yo.
  Gil. Believe me, I cannot.
  Ham. I do beseech yo.
  Gil. I know, no toch of it, my lord.
  Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with yor
    fingers and thmbs, give it breath with yor moth, and it will
    discorse most eloqent msic. Look yo, these are the stops.
  Gil. Bt these cannot I command to any tt'rance of harmony. I
    have not the skill.
  Ham. Why, look yo now, how nworthy a thing yo make of me! Yo
    wold play pon me; yo wold seem to know my stops; yo wold
    plck ot the heart of my mystery; yo wold sond me from my
    lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is mch msic,  
    excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot yo make it
    speak. 'Sblood, do yo think I am easier to be play'd on than a
    pipe? Call me what instrment yo will, thogh yo can fret me,
    yo cannot play pon me.

                        Enter Polonis.

    God bless yo, sir!
  Pol. My lord, the Qeen wold speak with yo, and presently.
  Ham. Do yo see yonder clod that's almost in shape of a camel?
  Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
  Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
  Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.
  Ham. Or like a whale.
  Pol. Very like a whale.
  Ham. Then will I come to my mother by-and-by.- They fool me to the
    top of my bent.- I will come by-and-by.
  Pol. I will say so.                                      Exit.
  Ham. 'By-and-by' is easily said.- Leave me, friends.
                                        [Exent all bt Hamlet.]  
    'Tis now the very witching time of night,
    When chrchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes ot
    Contagion to this world. Now cold I drink hot blood
    And do sch bitter bsiness as the day
    Wold qake to look on. Soft! now to my mother!
    O heart, lose not thy natre; let not ever
    The sol of Nero enter this firm bosom.
    Let me be crel, not nnatral;
    I will speak daggers to her, bt se none.
    My tonge and sol in this be hypocrites-
    How in my words somever she be shent,
    To give them seals never, my sol, consent!             Exit.




Scene III.
A room in the Castle.

Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Gildenstern.

  King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with s
    To let his madness range. Therefore prepare yo;
    I yor commission will forthwith dispatch,
    And he to England shall along with yo.
    The terms of or estate may not endre
    Hazard so near s as doth horly grow
    Ot of his lnacies.
  Gil. We will orselves provide.
    Most holy and religios fear it is
    To keep those many many bodies safe
    That live and feed pon yor Majesty.
  Ros. The single and pecliar life is bond
    With all the strength and armor of the mind
    To keep itself from noyance; bt mch more
    That spirit pon whose weal depends and rests
    The lives of many. The cesse of majesty
    Dies not alone, bt like a glf doth draw  
    What's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
    Fix'd on the smmit of the highest mont,
    To whose hge spokes ten thosand lesser things
    Are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
    Each small annexment, petty conseqence,
    Attends the boist'ros rin. Never alone
    Did the king sigh, bt with a general groan.
  King. Arm yo, I pray yo, to th', speedy voyage;
    For we will fetters pt pon this fear,
    Which now goes too free-footed.
  Both. We will haste s.
                                               Exent Gentlemen.

                   Enter Polonis.

  Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
    Behind the arras I'll convey myself
    To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
    And, as yo said, and wisely was it said,
    'Tis meet that some more adience than a mother,  
    Since natre makes them partial, shold o'erhear
    The speech, of vantage. Fare yo well, my liege.
    I'll call pon yo ere yo go to bed
    And tell yo what I know.
  King. Thanks, dear my lord.
                                                Exit [Polonis].
    O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
    It hath the primal eldest crse pon't,
    A brother's mrther! Pray can I not,
    Thogh inclination be as sharp as will.
    My stronger gilt defeats my strong intent,
    And, like a man to doble bsiness bond,
    I stand in pase where I shall first begin,
    And both neglect. What if this crsed hand
    Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
    Is there not rain enogh in the sweet heavens
    To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
    Bt to confront the visage of offence?
    And what's in prayer bt this twofold force,
    To be forestalled ere we come to fall,  
    Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look p;
    My falt is past. Bt, O, what form of prayer
    Can serve my trn? 'Forgive me my fol mrther'?
    That cannot be; since I am still possess'd
    Of those effects for which I did the mrther-
    My crown, mine own ambition, and my qeen.
    May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?
    In the corrpted crrents of this world
    Offence's gilded hand may shove by jstice,
    And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
    Bys ot the law; bt 'tis not so above.
    There is no shffling; there the action lies
    In his tre natre, and we orselves compell'd,
    Even to the teeth and forehead of or falts,
    To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
    Try what repentance can. What can it not?
    Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
    O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
    O limed sol, that, strggling to be free,
    Art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.  
    Bow, stbborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
    Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
    All may be well.                                  He kneels.

                         Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;
    And now I'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
    And so am I reveng'd. That wold be scann'd.
    A villain kills my father; and for that,
    I, his sole son, do this same villain send
    To heaven.
    Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
    He took my father grossly, fll of bread,
    With all his crimes broad blown, as flsh as May;
    And how his adit stands, who knows save heaven?
    Bt in or circmstance and corse of thoght,
    'Tis heavy with him; and am I then reveng'd,
    To take him in the prging of his sol,
    When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?  
    No.
    Up, sword, and know tho a more horrid hent.
    When he is drnk asleep; or in his rage;
    Or in th' incestos pleasre of his bed;
    At gaming, swearing, or abot some act
    That has no relish of salvation in't-
    Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
    And that his sol may be as damn'd and black
    As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
    This physic bt prolongs thy sickly days.              Exit.
  King. [rises] My words fly p, my thoghts remain below.
    Words withot thoghts never to heaven go.             Exit.




Scene IV.
The Qeen's closet.

Enter Qeen and Polonis.

  Pol. He will come straight. Look yo lay home to him.
    Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
    And that yor Grace hath screen'd and stood between
    Mch heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
    Pray yo be rond with him.
  Ham. (within) Mother, mother, mother!
  Qeen. I'll warrant yo; fear me not. Withdraw; I hear him coming.
                              [Polonis hides behind the arras.]

                          Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
  Qeen. Hamlet, tho hast thy father mch offended.
  Ham. Mother, yo have my father mch offended.
  Qeen. Come, come, yo answer with an idle tonge.
  Ham. Go, go, yo qestion with a wicked tonge.
  Qeen. Why, how now, Hamlet?  
  Ham. What's the matter now?
  Qeen. Have yo forgot me?
  Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
    Yo are the Qeen, yor hsband's brother's wife,
    And (wold it were not so!) yo are my mother.
  Qeen. Nay, then I'll set those to yo that can speak.
  Ham. Come, come, and sit yo down. Yo shall not bdge I
    Yo go not till I set yo p a glass
    Where yo may see the inmost part of yo.
  Qeen. What wilt tho do? Tho wilt not mrther me?
    Help, help, ho!
  Pol. [behind] What, ho! help, help, help!
  Ham. [draws] How now? a rat? Dead for a dcat, dead!
            [Makes a pass throgh the arras and] kills Polonis.
  Pol. [behind] O, I am slain!
  Qeen. O me, what hast tho done?
  Ham. Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
  Qeen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
  Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
    As kill a king, and marry with his brother.  
  Qeen. As kill a king?
  Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
                         [Lifts p the arras and sees Polonis.]
    Tho wretched, rash, intrding fool, farewell!
    I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortne.
    Tho find'st to be too bsy is some danger.
    Leave wringing of yor hinds. Peace! sit yo down
    And let me wring yor heart; for so I shall
    If it be made of penetrable stff;
    If damned cstom have not braz'd it so
    That it is proof and blwark against sense.
  Qeen. What have I done that tho dar'st wag thy tonge
    In noise so rde against me?
  Ham. Sch an act
    That blrs the grace and blsh of modesty;
    Calls virte hypocrite; takes off the rose
    From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
    And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
    As false as dicers' oaths. O, sch a deed
    As from the body of contraction plcks  
    The very sol, and sweet religion makes
    A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;
    Yea, this solidity and compond mass,
    With tristfl visage, as against the doom,
    Is thoght-sick at the act.
  Qeen. Ay me, what act,
    That roars so lod and thnders in the index?
  Ham. Look here pon th's pictre, and on this,
    The conterfeit presentment of two brothers.
    See what a grace was seated on this brow;
    Hyperion's crls; the front of Jove himself;
    An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;
    A station like the herald Mercry
    New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
    A combination and a form indeed
    Where every god did seem to set his seal
    To give the world assrance of a man.
    This was yor hsband. Look yo now what follows.
    Here is yor hsband, like a mildew'd ear
    Blasting his wholesome brother. Have yo eyes?  
    Cold yo on this fair montain leave to feed,
    And batten on this moor? Ha! have yo eyes
    Yo cannot call it love; for at yor age
    The heyday in the blood is tame, it's hmble,
    And waits pon the jdgment; and what jdgment
    Wold step from this to this? Sense sre yo have,
    Else cold yo not have motion; bt sre that sense
    Is apoplex'd; for madness wold not err,
    Nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
    Bt it reserv'd some qantity of choice
    To serve in sch a difference. What devil was't
    That ths hath cozen'd yo at hoodman-blind?
    Eyes withot feeling, feeling withot sight,
    Ears withot hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
    Or bt a sickly part of one tre sense
    Cold not so mope.
    O shame! where is thy blsh? Rebellios hell,
    If tho canst mtine in a matron's bones,
    To flaming yoth let virte be as wax
    And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame  
    When the complsive ardor gives the charge,
    Since frost itself as actively doth brn,
    And reason panders will.
  Qeen. O Hamlet, speak no more!
    Tho trn'st mine eyes into my very sol,
    And there I see sch black and grained spots
    As will not leave their tinct.
  Ham. Nay, bt to live
    In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
    Stew'd in corrption, honeying and making love
    Over the nasty sty!
  Qeen. O, speak to me no more!
    These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
    No more, sweet Hamlet!
  Ham. A mrtherer and a villain!
    A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
    Of yor precedent lord; a vice of kings;
    A ctprse of the empire and the rle,
    That from a shelf the precios diadem stole
    And pt it in his pocket!  
  Qeen. No more!

                Enter the Ghost in his nightgown.

  Ham. A king of shreds and patches!-
    Save me and hover o'er me with yor wings,
    Yo heavenly gards! What wold yor gracios figre?
  Qeen. Alas, he's mad!
  Ham. Do yo not come yor tardy son to chide,
    That, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
    Th' important acting of yor dread command?
    O, say!
  Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation
    Is bt to whet thy almost blnted prpose.
    Bt look, amazement on thy mother sits.
    O, step between her and her fighting sol
    Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
    Speak to her, Hamlet.
  Ham. How is it with yo, lady?
  Qeen. Alas, how is't with yo,  
    That yo do bend yor eye on vacancy,
    And with th' encorporal air do hold discorse?
    Forth at yor eyes yor spirits wildly peep;
    And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
    Yor bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
    Start p and stand an end. O gentle son,
    Upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
    Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do yo look?
  Ham. On him, on him! Look yo how pale he glares!
    His form and case conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
    Wold make them capable.- Do not look pon me,
    Lest with this piteos action yo convert
    My stern effects. Then what I have to do
    Will want tre color- tears perchance for blood.
  Qeen. To whom do yo speak this?
  Ham. Do yo see nothing there?
  Qeen. Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
  Ham. Nor did yo nothing hear?
  Qeen. No, nothing bt orselves.
  Ham. Why, look yo there! Look how it steals away!  
    My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
    Look where he goes even now ot at the portal!
                                                     Exit Ghost.
  Qeen. This is the very coinage of yor brain.
    This bodiless creation ecstasy
    Is very cnning in.
  Ham. Ecstasy?
    My plse as yors doth temperately keep time
    And makes as healthfl msic. It is not madness
    That I have tt'red. Bring me to the test,
    And I the matter will reword; which madness
    Wold gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
    Lay not that flattering nction to yor sol
    That not yor trespass bt my madness speaks.
    It will bt skin and film the lceros place,
    Whiles rank corrption, mining all within,
    Infects nseen. Confess yorself to heaven;
    Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
    And do not spread the compost on the weeds
    To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virte;  
    For in the fatness of these prsy times
    Virte itself of vice mst pardon beg-
    Yea, crb and woo for leave to do him good.
  Qeen. O Hamlet, tho hast cleft my heart in twain.
  Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
    And live the prer with the other half,
    Good night- bt go not to my ncle's bed.
    Assme a virte, if yo have it not.
    That monster, cstom, who all sense doth eat
    Of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
    That to the se of actions fair and good
    He likewise gives a frock or livery,
    That aptly is pt on. Refrain to-night,
    And that shall lend a kind of easiness
    To the next abstinence; the next more easy;
    For se almost can change the stamp of natre,
    And either [master] the devil, or throw him ot
    With wondros potency. Once more, good night;
    And when yo are desiros to be blest,
    I'll blessing beg of yo.- For this same lord,  
    I do repent; bt heaven hath pleas'd it so,
    To pnish me with this, and this with me,
    That I mst be their scorge and minister.
    I will bestow him, and will answer well
    The death I gave him. So again, good night.
    I mst be crel, only to be kind;
    Ths bad begins, and worse remains behind.
    One word more, good lady.
  Qeen. What shall I do?
  Ham. Not this, by no means, that I bid yo do:
    Let the bloat King tempt yo again to bed;
    Pinch wanton on yor cheek; call yo his mose;
    And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
    Or paddling in yor neck with his damn'd fingers,
    Make yo to ravel all this matter ot,
    That I essentially am not in madness,
    Bt mad in craft. 'Twere good yo let him know;
    For who that's bt a qeen, fair, sober, wise,
    Wold from a paddock, from a bat, a gib
    Sch dear concernings hide? Who wold do so?  
    No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
    Unpeg the basket on the hose's top,
    Let the birds fly, and like the famos ape,
    To try conclsions, in the basket creep
    And break yor own neck down.
  Qeen. Be tho assr'd, if words be made of breath,
    And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
    What tho hast said to me.
  Ham. I mst to England; yo know that?
  Qeen. Alack,
    I had forgot! 'Tis so conclded on.
  Ham. There's letters seal'd; and my two schoolfellows,
    Whom I will trst as I will adders fang'd,
    They bear the mandate; they mst sweep my way
    And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;
    For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
    Hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard
    Bt I will delve one yard below their mines
    And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
    When in one line two crafts directly meet.  
    This man shall set me packing.
    I'll lg the gts into the neighbor room.-
    Mother, good night.- Indeed, this consellor
    Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
    Who was in life a foolish peating knave.
    Come, sir, to draw toward an end with yo.
    Good night, mother.
                  [Exit the Qeen. Then] Exit Hamlet, tgging in
                                                       Polonis.





ACT IV. Scene I.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.

Enter King and Qeen, with Rosencrantz and Gildenstern.

  King. There's matter in these sighs. These profond heaves
    Yo mst translate; 'tis fit we nderstand them.
    Where is yor son?
  Qeen. Bestow this place on s a little while.
                          [Exent Rosencrantz and Gildenstern.]
    Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen to-night!
  King. What, Gertrde? How does Hamlet?
  Qeen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
    Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
    Behind the arras hearing something stir,
    Whips ot his rapier, cries 'A rat, a rat!'
    And in this brainish apprehension kills
    The nseen good old man.
  King. O heavy deed!
    It had been so with s, had we been there.
    His liberty is fll of threats to all-
    To yo yorself, to s, to every one.  
    Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
    It will be laid to s, whose providence
    Shold have kept short, restrain'd, and ot of hant
    This mad yong man. Bt so mch was or love
    We wold not nderstand what was most fit,
    Bt, like the owner of a fol disease,
    To keep it from divlging, let it feed
    Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
  Qeen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;
    O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
    Among a mineral of metals base,
    Shows itself pre. He weeps for what is done.
  King. O Gertrde, come away!
    The sn no sooner shall the montains toch
    Bt we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
    We mst with all or majesty and skill
    Both contenance and excse. Ho, Gildenstern!

             Enter Rosencrantz and Gildenstern.
  
    Friends both, go join yo with some frther aid.
    Hamlet in madness hath Polonis slain,
    And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.
    Go seek him ot; speak fair, and bring the body
    Into the chapel. I pray yo haste in this.
                          Exent [Rosencrantz and Gildenstern].
    Come, Gertrde, we'll call p or wisest friends
    And let them know both what we mean to do
    And what's ntimely done. [So haply slander-]
    Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
    As level as the cannon to his blank,
    Transports his poisoned shot- may miss or name
    And hit the wondless air.- O, come away!
    My sol is fll of discord and dismay.
                                                         Exent.




Scene II.
Elsinore. A passage in the Castle.

Enter Hamlet.

  Ham. Safely stow'd.
  Gentlemen. (within) Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
  Ham. Bt soft! What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.

               Enter Rosencrantz and Gildenstern.

  Ros. What have yo done, my lord, with the dead body?
  Ham. Componded it with dst, whereto 'tis kin.
  Ros. Tell s where 'tis, that we may take it thence
    And bear it to the chapel.
  Ham. Do not believe it.
  Ros. Believe what?
  Ham. That I can keep yor consel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
    demanded of a sponge, what replication shold be made by the son
    of a king?
  Ros. Take yo me for a sponge, my lord?
  Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks p the King's contenance, his rewards,  
    his athorities. Bt sch officers do the King best service in
    the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
    first moth'd, to be last Swallowed. When he needs what yo have
    glean'd, it is bt sqeezing yo and, sponge, yo shall be dry
    again.
  Ros. I nderstand yo not, my lord.
  Ham. I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
  Ros. My lord, yo mst tell s where the body is and go with s to
    the King.
  Ham. The body is with the King, bt the King is not with the body.
    The King is a thing-
  Gil. A thing, my lord?
  Ham. Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.
                                                         Exent.




Scene III.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.

Enter King.

  King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
    How dangeros is it that this man goes loose!
    Yet mst not we pt the strong law on him.
    He's lov'd of the distracted mltitde,
    Who like not in their jdgment, bt their eyes;
    And where 'tis so, th' offender's scorge is weigh'd,
    Bt never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
    This sdden sending him away mst seem
    Deliberate pase. Diseases desperate grown
    By desperate appliance are reliev'd,
    Or not at all.

                    Enter Rosencrantz.

    How now O What hath befall'n?
  Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
    We cannot get from him.  
  King. Bt where is he?
  Ros. Withot, my lord; garded, to know yor pleasre.
  King. Bring him before s.
  Ros. Ho, Gildenstern! Bring in my lord.

        Enter Hamlet and Gildenstern [with Attendants].

  King. Now, Hamlet, where's Polonis?
  Ham. At spper.
  King. At spper? Where?
  Ham. Not where he eats, bt where he is eaten. A certain
    convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Yor worm is yor
    only emperor for diet. We fat all creatres else to fat s, and
    we fat orselves for maggots. Yor fat king and yor lean beggar
    is bt variable service- two dishes, bt to one table. That's the
    end.
  King. Alas, alas!
  Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
    of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
  King. What dost tho mean by this?  
  Ham. Nothing bt to show yo how a king may go a progress throgh
    the gts of a beggar.
  King. Where is Polonis?
  Ham. In heaven. Send thither to see. If yor messenger find him not
    there, seek him i' th' other place yorself. Bt indeed, if yo
    find him not within this month, yo shall nose him as yo go p
    the stair, into the lobby.
  King. Go seek him there. [To Attendants.]
  Ham. He will stay till yo come.
                                            [Exent Attendants.]
  King. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,-
    Which we do tender as we dearly grieve
    For that which tho hast done,- mst send thee hence
    With fiery qickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
    The bark is ready and the wind at help,
    Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
    For England.
  Ham. For England?
  King. Ay, Hamlet.
  Ham. Good.  
  King. So is it, if tho knew'st or prposes.
  Ham. I see a cherb that sees them. Bt come, for England!
    Farewell, dear mother.
  King. Thy loving father, Hamlet.
  Ham. My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
    one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!
Exit.
  King. Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
    Delay it not; I'll have him hence to-night.
    Away! for everything is seal'd and done
    That else leans on th' affair. Pray yo make haste.
                            Exent Rosencrantz and Gildenstern]
    And, England, if my love tho hold'st at aght,-
    As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
    Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
    After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
    Pays homage to s,- tho mayst not coldly set
    Or sovereign process, which imports at fll,
    By letters congring to that effect,
    The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;  
    For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
    And tho mst cre me. Till I know 'tis done,
    Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begn.             Exit.





Scene IV.
Near Elsinore.

Enter Fortinbras with his Army over the stage.

  For. Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
    Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
    Craves the conveyance of a promis'd march
    Over his kingdom. Yo know the rendezvos.
    if that his Majesty wold aght with s,
    We shall express or dty in his eye;
    And let him know so.
  Capt. I will do't, my lord.
  For. Go softly on.
                                   Exent [all bt the Captain].

       Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, [Gildenstern,] and others.

  Ham. Good sir, whose powers are these?
  Capt. They are of Norway, sir.
  Ham. How prpos'd, sir, I pray yo?
  Capt. Against some part of Poland.  
  Ham. Who commands them, sir?
  Capt. The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
  Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
    Or for some frontier?
  Capt. Trly to speak, and with no addition,
    We go to gain a little patch of grond
    That hath in it no profit bt the name.
    To pay five dcats, five, I wold not farm it;
    Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
    A ranker rate, shold it be sold in fee.
  Ham. Why, then the Polack never will defend it.
  Capt. Yes, it is already garrison'd.
  Ham. Two thosand sols and twenty thosand dcats
    Will not debate the qestion of this straw.
    This is th' imposthme of mch wealth and peace,
    That inward breaks, and shows no case withot
    Why the man dies.- I hmbly thank yo, sir.
  Capt. God b' wi' yo, sir.                             [Exit.]
  Ros. Will't please yo go, my lord?
  Ham. I'll be with yo straight. Go a little before.  
                                        [Exent all bt Hamlet.]
    How all occasions do inform against me
    And spr my dll revenge! What is a man,
    If his chief good and market of his time
    Be bt to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
    Sre he that made s with sch large discorse,
    Looking before and after, gave s not
    That capability and godlike reason
    To fst in s ns'd. Now, whether it be
    Bestial oblivion, or some craven scrple
    Of thinking too precisely on th' event,-
    A thoght which, qarter'd, hath bt one part wisdom
    And ever three parts coward,- I do not know
    Why yet I live to say 'This thing's to do,'
    Sith I have case, and will, and strength, and means
    To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me.
    Witness this army of sch mass and charge,
    Led by a delicate and tender prince,
    Whose spirit, with divine ambition pff'd,
    Makes moths at the invisible event,  
    Exposing what is mortal and nsre
    To all that fortne, death, and danger dare,
    Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
    Is not to stir withot great argment,
    Bt greatly to find qarrel in a straw
    When honor's at the stake. How stand I then,
    That have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
    Excitements of my reason and my blood,
    And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
    The imminent death of twenty thosand men
    That for a fantasy and trick of fame
    Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
    Whereon the nmbers cannot try the case,
    Which is not tomb enogh and continent
    To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
    My thoghts be bloody, or be nothing worth!            Exit.





Scene V.
Elsinore. A room in the Castle.

Enter Horatio, Qeen, and a Gentleman.

  Qeen. I will not speak with her.
  Gent. She is importnate, indeed distract.
    Her mood will needs be pitied.
  Qeen. What wold she have?
  Gent. She speaks mch of her father; says she hears
    There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart;
    Sprns enviosly at straws; speaks things in dobt,
    That carry bt half sense. Her speech is nothing,
    Yet the nshaped se of it doth move
    The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
    And botch the words p fit to their own thoghts;
    Which, as her winks and nods and gestres yield them,
    Indeed wold make one think there might be thoght,
    Thogh nothing sre, yet mch nhappily.
  Hor. 'Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
    Dangeros conjectres in ill-breeding minds.
  Qeen. Let her come in.  
                                               [Exit Gentleman.]
    [Aside] To my sick sol (as sin's tre natre is)
    Each toy seems Prologe to some great amiss.
    So fll of artless jealosy is gilt
    It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

                 Enter Ophelia distracted.

  Oph. Where is the beateos Majesty of Denmark?
  Qeen. How now, Ophelia?
  Oph. (sings)
         How shold I yor tre-love know
           From another one?
         By his cockle bat and' staff
           And his sandal shoon.

  Qeen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
  Oph. Say yo? Nay, pray Yo mark.

    (Sings) He is dead and gone, lady,  
              He is dead and gone;
            At his head a grass-green trf,
              At his heels a stone.

    O, ho!
  Qeen. Nay, bt Ophelia-
  Oph. Pray yo mark.

    (Sings) White his shrod as the montain snow-

                    Enter King.

  Qeen. Alas, look here, my lord!
  Oph. (Sings)
           Larded all with sweet flowers;
         Which bewept to the grave did not go
           With tre-love showers.

  King. How do yo, pretty lady?
  Oph. Well, God dild yo! They say the owl was a baker's daghter.  
    Lord, we know what we are, bt know not what we may be. God be at
    yor table!
  King. Conceit pon her father.
  Oph. Pray let's have no words of this; bt when they ask, yo what
    it means, say yo this:

    (Sings) To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
              All in the morning bedtime,
            And I a maid at yor window,
              To be yor Valentine.

            Then p he rose and donn'd his clo'es
              And dpp'd the chamber door,
            Let in the maid, that ot a maid
              Never departed more.

  King. Pretty Ophelia!
  Oph. Indeed, la, withot an oath, I'll make an end on't!

    [Sings] By Gis and by Saint Charity,  
              Alack, and fie for shame!
            Yong men will do't if they come to't
              By Cock, they are to blame.

            Qoth she, 'Before yo tmbled me,
              Yo promis'd me to wed.'

    He answers:

            'So wold I 'a' done, by yonder sn,
              An tho hadst not come to my bed.'

  King. How long hath she been ths?
  Oph. I hope all will be well. We mst be patient; bt I cannot
    choose bt weep to think they wold lay him i' th' cold grond.
    My brother shall know of it; and so I thank yo for yor good
    consel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet
    ladies. Good night, good night.                         Exit
  King. Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray yo.
                                                 [Exit Horatio.]  
    O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
    All from her father's death. O Gertrde, Gertrde,
    When sorrows come, they come not single spies.
    Bt in battalions! First, her father slain;
    Next, Yor son gone, and he most violent athor
    Of his own jst remove; the people mddied,
    Thick and and nwholesome in their thoghts and whispers
    For good Polonis' death, and we have done bt greenly
    In hgger-mgger to inter him; Poor Ophelia
    Divided from herself and her fair-jdgment,
    Withot the which we are Pictres or mere beasts;
    Last, and as sch containing as all these,
    Her brother is in secret come from France;
    And wants not bzzers to infect his ear
    Feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clods,
    With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
    Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
    Will nothing stick Or person to arraign
    In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrde, this,
    Like to a mrd'ring piece, in many places  
    Give, me sperflos death.                  A noise within.
  Qeen. Alack, what noise is this?
  King. Where are my Switzers? Let them gard the door.

                     Enter a Messenger.

    What is the matter?
  Mess. Save Yorself, my lord:
    The ocean, overpeering of his list,
    Eats not the flats with more impetos haste
    Than Yong Laertes, in a riotos head,
    O'erbears Yor offices. The rabble call him lord;
    And, as the world were now bt to begin,
    Antiqity forgot, cstom not known,
    The ratifiers and props of every word,
    They cry 'Choose we! Laertes shall be king!'
    Caps, hands, and tonges applad it to the clods,
    'Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!'
                                                 A noise within.
  Qeen. How cheerflly on the false trail they cry!  
    O, this is conter, yo false Danish dogs!
  King. The doors are broke.

                    Enter Laertes with others.

  Laer. Where is this king?- Sirs, staid yo all withot.
  All. No, let's come in!
  Laer. I pray yo give me leave.
  All. We will, we will!
  Laer. I thank yo. Keep the door.      [Exent his Followers.]
    O tho vile king,
    Give me my father!
  Qeen. Calmly, good Laertes.
  Laer. That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;
    Cries cckold to my father; brands the harlot
    Even here between the chaste nsmirched brows
    Of my tre mother.
  King. What is the case, Laertes,
    That thy rebellion looks so giantlike?
    Let him go, Gertrde. Do not fear or person.  
    There's sch divinity doth hedge a king
    That treason can bt peep to what it wold,
    Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,
    Why tho art ths incens'd. Let him go, Gertrde.
    Speak, man.
  Laer. Where is my father?
  King. Dead.
  Qeen. Bt not by him!
  King. Let him demand his fill.
  Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be jggled with:
    To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil
    Conscience and grace, to the profondest pit!
    I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
    That both the world, I give to negligence,
    Let come what comes; only I'll be reveng'd
    Most throghly for my father.
  King. Who shall stay yo?
  Laer. My will, not all the world!
    And for my means, I'll hsband them so well
    They shall go far with little.  
  King. Good Laertes,
    If yo desire to know the certainty
    Of yor dear father's death, is't writ in Yor revenge
    That swoopstake yo will draw both friend and foe,
    Winner and loser?
  Laer. None bt his enemies.
  King. Will yo know them then?
  Laer. To his good friends ths wide I'll ope my arms
    And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
    Repast them with my blood.
  King. Why, now Yo speak
    Like a good child and a tre gentleman.
    That I am giltless of yor father's death,
    And am most sensibly in grief for it,
    It shall as level to yor jdgment pierce
    As day does to yor eye.
                              A noise within: 'Let her come in.'
  Laer. How now? What noise is that?

                      Enter Ophelia.  

    O heat, dry p my brains! Tears seven times salt
    Brn ot the sense and virte of mine eye!
    By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight
    Till or scale trn the beam. O rose of May!
    Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
    O heavens! is't possible a yong maid's wits
    Shold be as mortal as an old man's life?
    Natre is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
    It sends some precios instance of itself
    After the thing it loves.

  Oph. (sings)
         They bore him barefac'd on the bier
           (Hey non nony, nony, hey nony)
         And in his grave rain'd many a tear.

    Fare yo well, my dove!
  Laer. Hadst tho thy wits, and didst persade revenge,
    It cold not move ths.  
  Oph. Yo mst sing 'A-down a-down, and yo call him a-down-a.' O,
    how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his
    master's daghter.
  Laer. This nothing's more than matter.
  Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray yo, love,
    remember. And there is pansies, that's for thoghts.
  Laer. A docment in madness! Thoghts and remembrance fitted.
  Oph. There's fennel for yo, and colmbines. There's re for yo,
    and here's some for me. We may call it herb of grace o' Sndays.
    O, yo mst wear yor re with a difference! There's a daisy. I
    wold give yo some violets, bt they wither'd all when my father
    died. They say he made a good end.

    [Sings] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

  Laer. Thoght and affliction, passion, hell itself,
    She trns to favor and to prettiness.
  Oph. (sings)
         And will he not come again?
         And will he not come again?
           No, no, he is dead;  
           Go to thy deathbed;
         He never will come again.

         His beard was as white as snow,
         All flaxen was his poll.
           He is gone, he is gone,
           And we cast away moan.
         God 'a'mercy on his sol!

    And of all Christian sols, I pray God. God b' wi', yo.
Exit.
  Laer. Do yo see this, O God?
  King. Laertes, I mst commne with yor grief,
    Or yo deny me right. Go bt apart,
    Make choice of whom yor wisest friends yo will,
    And they shall hear and jdge 'twixt yo and me.
    If by direct or by collateral hand
    They find s toch'd, we will or kingdom give,
    Or crown, or life, and all that we call ors,
    To yo in satisfaction; bt if not,  
    Be yo content to lend yor patience to s,
    And we shall jointly labor with yor sol
    To give it de content.
  Laer. Let this be so.
    His means of death, his obscre fneral-
    No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
    No noble rite nor formal ostentation,-
    Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
    That I mst call't in qestion.
  King. So yo shall;
    And where th' offence is let the great axe fall.
    I pray yo go with me.
                                                          Exent





Scene VI.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.

Enter Horatio with an Attendant.

  Hor. What are they that wold speak with me?
  Servant. Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for yo.
  Hor. Let them come in.
                                               [Exit Attendant.]
    I do not know from what part of the world
    I shold be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

                          Enter Sailors.

  Sailor. God bless yo, sir.
  Hor. Let him bless thee too.
  Sailor. 'A shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for yo,
    sir,- it comes from th' ambassador that was bond for England- if
    yor name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.
  Hor. (reads the letter) 'Horatio, when tho shalt have overlook'd
    this, give these fellows some means to the King. They have
    letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of  
    very warlike appointment gave s chase. Finding orselves too
    slow of sail, we pt on a compelled valor, and in the grapple I
    boarded them. On the instant they got clear of or ship; so I
    alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves
    of mercy; bt they knew what they did: I am to do a good trn for
    them. Let the King have the letters I have sent, and repair tho
    to me with as mch speed as tho woldst fly death. I have words
    to speak in thine ear will make thee dmb; yet are they mch too
    light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
    thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Gildenstern hold their corse
    for England. Of them I have mch to tell thee. Farewell.
                            'He that tho knowest thine, HAMLET.'

    Come, I will give yo way for these yor letters,
    And do't the speedier that yo may direct me
    To him from whom yo broght them.                   Exent.





Scene VII.
Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.

Enter King and Laertes.

  King. Now mst yor conscience my acqittance seal,
    And Yo mst pt me in yor heart for friend,
    Sith yo have heard, and with a knowing ear,
    That he which hath yor noble father slain
    Prsed my life.
  Laer. It well appears. Bt tell me
    Why yo proceeded not against these feats
    So crimefl and so capital in natre,
    As by yor safety, wisdom, all things else,
    Yo mainly were stirr'd p.
  King. O, for two special reasons,
    Which may to yo, perhaps, seein mch nsinew'd,
    Bt yet to me they are strong. The Qeen his mother
    Lives almost by his looks; and for myself,-
    My virte or my plage, be it either which,-
    She's so conjnctive to my life and sol
    That, as the star moves not bt in his sphere,  
    I cold not bt by her. The other motive
    Why to a pblic cont I might not go
    Is the great love the general gender bear him,
    Who, dipping all his falts in their affection,
    Wold, like the spring that trneth wood to stone,
    Convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows,
    Too slightly timber'd for so lod a wind,
    Wold have reverted to my bow again,
    And not where I had aim'd them.
  Laer. And so have I a noble father lost;
    A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
    Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
    Stood challenger on mont of all the age
    For her perfections. Bt my revenge will come.
  King. Break not yor sleeps for that. Yo mst not think
    That we are made of stff so flat and dll
    That we can let or beard be shook with danger,
    And think it pastime. Yo shortly shall hear more.
    I lov'd yor father, and we love orself,
    And that, I hope, will teach yo to imagine-  

                 Enter a Messenger with letters.

    How now? What news?
  Mess. Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:
    This to yor Majesty; this to the Qeen.
  King. From Hamlet? Who broght them?
  Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.
    They were given me by Cladio; he receiv'd them
    Of him that broght them.
  King. Laertes, yo shall hear them.
    Leave s.
                                                 Exit Messenger.
    [Reads]'High and Mighty,-Yo shall know I am set naked on yor
    kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to see yor kingly eyes;
    when I shall (first asking yor pardon therento) recont the
    occasion of my sdden and more strange retrn.
                                                     'HAMLET.'
    What shold this mean? Are all the rest come back?
    Or is it some abse, and no sch thing?  
  Laer. Know yo the hand?
  King. 'Tis Hamlet's character. 'Naked!'
    And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.'
    Can yo advise me?
  Laer. I am lost in it, my lord. Bt let him come!
    It warms the very sickness in my heart
    That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,
    'Ths didest tho.'
  King. If it be so, Laertes
    (As how shold it be so? how otherwise?),
    Will yo be rl'd by me?
  Laer. Ay my lord,
    So yo will not o'errle me to a peace.
  King. To thine own peace. If he be now retrn'd
    As checking at his voyage, and that he means
    No more to ndertake it, I will work him
    To exploit now ripe in my device,
    Under the which he shall not choose bt fall;
    And for his death no wind
    Bt even his mother shall ncharge the practice  
    And call it accident.
  Laer. My lord, I will be rl'd;
    The rather, if yo cold devise it so
    That I might be the organ.
  King. It falls right.
    Yo have been talk'd of since yor travel mch,
    And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a qality
    Wherein they say yo shine, Yor sn of parts
    Did not together plck sch envy from him
    As did that one; and that, in my regard,
    Of the nworthiest siege.
  Laer. What part is that, my lord?
  King. A very riband in the cap of yoth-
    Yet needfll too; for yoth no less becomes
    The light and careless livery that it wears
    Thin settled age his sables and his weeds,
    Importing health and graveness. Two months since
    Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
    I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the French,
    And they can well on horseback; bt this gallant  
    Had witchcraft in't. He grew nto his seat,
    And to sch wondros doing broght his horse
    As had he been incorps'd and demi-natr'd
    With the brave beast. So far he topp'd my thoght
    That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
    Come short of what he did.
  Laer. A Norman was't?
  King. A Norman.
  Laer. Upon my life, Lamond.
  King. The very same.
  Laer. I know him well. He is the broach indeed
    And gem of all the nation.
  King. He made confession of yo;
    And gave yo sch a masterly report
    For art and exercise in yor defence,
    And for yor rapier most especially,
    That he cried ot 'twold be a sight indeed
    If one cold match yo. The scrimers of their nation
    He swore had neither motion, gard, nor eye,
    If yo oppos'd them. Sir, this report of his  
    Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
    That he cold nothing do bt wish and beg
    Yor sdden coming o'er to play with yo.
    Now, ot of this-
  Laer. What ot of this, my lord?
  King. Laertes, was yor father dear to yo?
    Or are yo like the painting of a sorrow,
    A face withot a heart,'
  Laer. Why ask yo this?
  King. Not that I think yo did not love yor father;
    Bt that I know love is begn by time,
    And that I see, in passages of proof,
    Time qalifies the spark and fire of it.
    There lives within the very flame of love
    A kind of wick or snff that will abate it;
    And nothing is at a like goodness still;
    For goodness, growing to a plrisy,
    Dies in his own too-mch. That we wold do,
    We shold do when we wold; for this 'wold' changes,
    And hath abatements and delays as many  
    As there are tonges, are hands, are accidents;
    And then this 'shold' is like a spendthrift sigh,
    That hrts by easing. Bt to the qick o' th' lcer!
    Hamlet comes back. What wold yo ndertake
    To show yorself yor father's son in deed
    More than in words?
  Laer. To ct his throat i' th' chrch!
  King. No place indeed shold mrther sanctarize;
    Revenge shold have no bonds. Bt, good Laertes,
    Will yo do this? Keep close within yor chamber.
    Will retrn'd shall know yo are come home.
    We'll pt on those shall praise yor excellence
    And set a doble varnish on the fame
    The Frenchman gave yo; bring yo in fine together
    And wager on yor heads. He, being remiss,
    Most generos, and free from all contriving,
    Will not perse the foils; so that with ease,
    Or with a little shffling, yo may choose
    A sword nbated, and, in a pass of practice,
    Reqite him for yor father.  
  Laer. I will do't!
    And for that prpose I'll anoint my sword.
    I boght an nction of a montebank,
    So mortal that, bt dip a knife in it,
    Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
    Collected from all simples that have virte
    Under the moon, can save the thing from death
    This is bt scratch'd withal. I'll toch my point
    With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
    It may be death.
  King. Let's frther think of this,
    Weigh what convenience both of time and means
    May fit s to or shape. If this shold fall,
    And that or drift look throgh or bad performance.
    'Twere better not assay'd. Therefore this project
    Shold have a back or second, that might hold
    If this did blast in proof. Soft! let me see.
    We'll make a solemn wager on yor cnnings-
    I ha't!
    When in yor motion yo are hot and dry-  
    As make yor bots more violent to that end-
    And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepar'd him
    A chalice for the nonce; whereon bt sipping,
    If he by chance escape yor venom'd stck,
    Or prpose may hold there.- Bt stay, what noise,

                           Enter Qeen.

    How now, sweet qeen?
  Qeen. One woe doth tread pon another's heel,
    So fast they follow. Yor sister's drown'd, Laertes.
  Laer. Drown'd! O, where?
  Qeen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
    That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
    There with fantastic garlands did she come
    Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long prples,
    That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
    Bt or cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
    There on the pendant boghs her coronet weeds
    Clamb'ring to hang, an envios sliver broke,  
    When down her weedy trophies and herself
    Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide
    And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her p;
    Which time she chanted snatches of old tnes,
    As one incapable of her own distress,
    Or like a creatre native and inded
    Unto that element; bt long it cold not be
    Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
    Pll'd the poor wretch from her melodios lay
    To mddy death.
  Laer. Alas, then she is drown'd?
  Qeen. Drown'd, drown'd.
  Laer. Too mch of water hast tho, poor Ophelia,
    And therefore I forbid my tears; bt yet
    It is or trick; natre her cstom holds,
    Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
    The woman will be ot. Adie, my lord.
    I have a speech of fire, that fain wold blaze
    Bt that this folly dots it.                          Exit.
  King. Let's follow, Gertrde.  
    How mch I had to do to calm his rage I
    Now fear I this will give it start again;
    Therefore let's follow.
                                                         Exent.





ACT V. Scene I.
Elsinore. A chrchyard.

Enter two Clowns, [with spades and pickaxes].

  Clown. Is she to be bried in Christian brial when she wilflly
    seeks her own salvation?
  Other. I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.
    The crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian brial.
  Clown. How can that be, nless she drown'd herself in her own
    defence?
  Other. Why, 'tis fond so.
  Clown. It mst be se offendendo; it cannot be else. For here lies
    the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it arges an act; and an
    act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;
    argal, she drown'd herself wittingly.
  Other. Nay, bt hear yo, Goodman Delver!
  Clown. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
    man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
    will he nill he, he goes- mark yo that. Bt if the water come to
    him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not
    gilty of his own death shortens not his own life.  
  Other. Bt is this law?
  Clown. Ay, marry, is't- crowner's qest law.
  Other. Will yo ha' the trth an't? If this had not been a
    gentlewoman, she shold have been bried ot o' Christian brial.
  Clown. Why, there tho say'st! And the more pity that great folk
    shold have cont'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves
    more than their even-Christen. Come, my spade! There is no
    ancient gentlemen bt gard'ners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They
    hold p Adam's profession.
  Other. Was he a gentleman?
  Clown. 'A was the first that ever bore arms.
  Other. Why, he had none.
  Clown. What, art a heathen? How dost tho nderstand the Scriptre?
    The Scriptre says Adam digg'd. Cold he dig withot arms? I'll
    pt another qestion to thee. If tho answerest me not to the
    prpose, confess thyself-
  Other. Go to!
  Clown. What is he that bilds stronger than either the mason, the
    shipwright, or the carpenter?
  Other. The gallows-maker; for that frame otlives a thosand  
    tenants.
  Clown. I like thy wit well, in good faith. The gallows does well.
    Bt how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now,
    tho dost ill to say the gallows is bilt stronger than the
    chrch. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!
  Other. Who bilds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
    carpenter?
  Clown. Ay, tell me that, and nyoke.
  Other. Marry, now I can tell!
  Clown. To't.
  Other. Mass, I cannot tell.

                 Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.

  Clown. Cdgel thy brains no more abot it, for yor dll ass will
    not mend his pace with beating; and when yo are ask'd this
    qestion next, say 'a grave-maker.' The hoses he makes lasts
    till doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaghan; fetch me a stop of
    liqor.
                                            [Exit Second Clown.]  

                       [Clown digs and] sings.

       In yoth when I did love, did love,
         Methoght it was very sweet;
       To contract- O- the time for- a- my behove,
         O, methoght there- a- was nothing- a- meet.

  Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his bsiness, that he sings at
    grave-making?
  Hor. Cstom hath made it in him a Property of easiness.
  Ham. 'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier
    sense.
  Clown. (sings)
         Bt age with his stealing steps
           Hath clawed me in his cltch,
         And hath shipped me intil the land,
           As if I had never been sch.
                                            [Throws p a skll.]
  
  Ham. That skll had a tonge in it, and cold sing once. How the
    knave jowls it to the grond,as if 'twere Cain's jawbone, that
    did the first mrther! This might be the pate of a Politician,
    which this ass now o'erreaches; one that wold circmvent God,
    might it not?
  Hor. It might, my lord.
  Ham. Or of a cortier, which cold say 'Good morrow, sweet lord!
    How dost tho, good lord?' This might be my Lord Sch-a-one, that
    prais'd my Lord Sch-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might
    it not?
  Hor. Ay, my lord.
  Ham. Why, e'en so! and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and knock'd
    abot the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revoltion,
    and we had the trick to see't. Did these bones cost no more the
    breeding bt to play at loggets with 'em? Mine ache to think
    on't.
  Clown. (Sings)
         A pickaxe and a spade, a spade,
           For and a shroding sheet;
         O, a Pit of clay for to be made  
           For sch a gest is meet.
                                      Throws p [another skll].

  Ham. There's another. Why may not that be the skll of a lawyer?
    Where be his qiddits now, his qillets, his cases, his tenres,
    and his tricks? Why does he sffer this rde knave now to knock
    him abot the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him
    of his action of battery? Hm! This fellow might be in's time a
    great byer of land, with his stattes, his recognizances, his
    fines, his doble vochers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of
    his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
    pate fll of fine dirt? Will his vochers voch him no more of
    his prchases, and doble ones too, than the length and breadth
    of a pair of indentres? The very conveyances of his lands will
    scarcely lie in this box; and mst th' inheritor himself have no
    more, ha?
  Hor. Not a jot more, my lord.
  Ham. Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
  Hor. Ay, my lord, And of calveskins too.
  Ham. They are sheep and calves which seek ot assrance in that. I  
    will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah?
  Clown. Mine, sir.

    [Sings] O, a pit of clay for to be made
              For sch a gest is meet.

  Ham. I think it be thine indeed, for tho liest in't.
  Clown. Yo lie ot on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yors.
    For my part, I do not lie in't, yet it is mine.
  Ham. Tho dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine. 'Tis for
    the dead, not for the qick; therefore tho liest.
  Clown. 'Tis a qick lie, sir; 'twill away again from me to yo.
  Ham. What man dost tho dig it for?
  Clown. For no man, sir.
  Ham. What woman then?
  Clown. For none neither.
  Ham. Who is to be bried in't?
  Clown. One that was a woman, sir; bt, rest her sol, she's dead.
  Ham. How absolte the knave is! We mst speak by the card, or
    eqivocation will ndo s. By the Lord, Horatio, this three years
    I have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe  
    of the peasant comes so near the heel of the cortier he galls
    his kibe.- How long hast tho been a grave-maker?
  Clown. Of all the days i' th' year, I came to't that day that or
    last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.
  Ham. How long is that since?
  Clown. Cannot yo tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
    very day that yong Hamlet was born- he that is mad, and sent
    into England.
  Ham. Ay, marry, why was be sent into England?
  Clown. Why, becase 'a was mad. 'A shall recover his wits there;
    or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.
  Ham. Why?
  Clown. 'Twill not he seen in him there. There the men are as mad as
    he.
  Ham. How came he mad?
  Clown. Very strangely, they say.
  Ham. How strangely?
  Clown. Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
  Ham. Upon what grond?
  Clown. Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy  
    thirty years.
  Ham. How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
  Clown. Faith, if 'a be not rotten before 'a die (as we have many
    pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, I
    will last yo some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last
    yo nine year.
  Ham. Why he more than another?
  Clown. Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will
    keep ot water a great while; and yor water is a sore decayer of
    yor whoreson dead body. Here's a skll now. This skll hath lien
    yo i' th' earth three-and-twenty years.
  Ham. Whose was it?
  Clown. A whoreson, mad fellow's it was. Whose do yo think it was?
  Ham. Nay, I know not.
  Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad roge! 'A por'd a flagon of
    Rhenish on my head once. This same skll, sir, was Yorick's
    skll, the King's jester.
  Ham. This?
  Clown. E'en that.
  Ham. Let me see. [Takes the skll.] Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him,  
    Horatio. A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He
    hath borne me on his back a thosand tnes. And now how abhorred
    in my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hng those
    lips that I have kiss'd I know not how oft. Where be yor gibes
    now? yor gambols? yor songs? yor flashes of merriment that
    were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock yor
    own grinning? Qite chap- fall'n? Now get yo to my lady's
    chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this
    favor she mst come. Make her lagh at that. Prithee, Horatio,
    tell me one thing.
  Hor. What's that, my lord?
  Ham. Dost tho think Alexander look'd o' this fashion i' th' earth?
  Hor. E'en so.
  Ham. And smelt so? Pah!
                                          [Pts down the skll.]
  Hor. E'en so, my lord.
  Ham. To what base ses we may retrn, Horatio! Why may not
    imagination trace the noble dst of Alexander till he find it
    stopping a bnghole?
  Hor. 'Twere to consider too criosly, to consider so.  
  Ham. No, faith, not a jot; bt to follow him thither with modesty
    enogh, and likelihood to lead it; as ths: Alexander died,
    Alexander was bried, Alexander retrneth into dst; the dst is
    earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he
    was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?
    Imperios Caesar, dead and trn'd to clay,
    Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
    O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
    Shold patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
    Bt soft! bt soft! aside! Here comes the King-

    Enter [priests with] a coffin [in fneral procession], King,
             Qeen, Laertes, with Lords attendant.]

    The Qeen, the cortiers. Who is this they follow?
    And with sch maimed rites? This doth betoken
    The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
    Fordo it own life. 'Twas of some estate.
    Coch we awhile, and mark.
                                         [Retires with Horatio.]  
  Laer. What ceremony else?
  Ham. That is Laertes,
    A very noble yoth. Mark.
  Laer. What ceremony else?
  Priest. Her obseqies have been as far enlarg'd
    As we have warranty. Her death was dobtfl;
    And, bt that great command o'ersways the order,
    She shold in grond nsanctified have lodg'd
    Till the last trmpet. For charitable prayers,
    Shards, flints, and pebbles shold be thrown on her.
    Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,
    Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
    Of bell and brial.
  Laer. Mst there no more be done?
  Priest. No more be done.
    We shold profane the service of the dead
    To sing a reqiem and sch rest to her
    As to peace-parted sols.
  Laer. Lay her i' th' earth;
    And from her fair and npollted flesh  
    May violets spring! I tell thee, chrlish priest,
    A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
    When tho liest howling.
  Ham. What, the fair Ophelia?
  Qeen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.
                                             [Scatters flowers.]
    I hop'd tho sholdst have been my Hamlet's wife;
    I thoght thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
    And not have strew'd thy grave.
  Laer. O, treble woe
    Fall ten times treble on that crsed head
    Whose wicked deed thy most ingenios sense
    Depriv'd thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
    Till I have caght her once more in mine arms.
                                             Leaps in the grave.
    Now pile yor dst pon the qick and dead
    Till of this flat a montain yo have made
    T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
    Of ble Olymps.
  Ham. [comes forward] What is he whose grief  
    Bears sch an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow
    Conjres the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
    Like wonder-wonded hearers? This is I,
    Hamlet the Dane.                    [Leaps in after Laertes.
  Laer. The devil take thy sol!
                                            [Grapples with him].
  Ham. Tho pray'st not well.
    I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
    For, thogh I am not splenitive and rash,
    Yet have I in me something dangeros,
    Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand!
  King. Plck thein asnder.
  Qeen. Hamlet, Hamlet!
  All. Gentlemen!
  Hor. Good my lord, be qiet.
             [The Attendants part them, and they come ot of the
                                                         grave.]
  Ham. Why, I will fight with him pon this theme
    Until my eyelids will no longer wag.
  Qeen. O my son, what theme?  
  Ham. I lov'd Ophelia. Forty thosand brothers
    Cold not (with all their qantity of love)
    Make p my sm. What wilt tho do for her?
  King. O, he is mad, Laertes.
  Qeen. For love of God, forbear him!
  Ham. 'Swonds, show me what tho't do.
    Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?
    Woo't drink p esill? eat a crocodile?
    I'll do't. Dost tho come here to whine?
    To otface me with leaping in her grave?
    Be bried qick with her, and so will I.
    And if tho prate of montains, let them throw
    Millions of acres on s, till or grond,
    Singeing his pate against the brning zone,
    Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an tho'lt moth,
    I'll rant as well as tho.
  Qeen. This is mere madness;
    And ths a while the fit will work on him.
    Anon, as patient as the female dove
    When that her golden coplets are disclos'd,  
    His silence will sit drooping.
  Ham. Hear yo, sir!
    What is the reason that yo se me ths?
    I lov'd yo ever. Bt it is no matter.
    Let Hercles himself do what he may,
    The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
Exit.
  King. I pray thee, good Horatio, wait pon him.
                                                   Exit Horatio.
    [To Laertes] Strengthen yor patience in or last night's speech.
    We'll pt the matter to the present psh.-
    Good Gertrde, set some watch over yor son.-
    This grave shall have a living monment.
    An hor of qiet shortly shall we see;
    Till then in patience or proceeding be.
                                                         Exent.




Scene II.
Elsinore. A hall in the Castle.

Enter Hamlet and Horatio.

  Ham. So mch for this, sir; now shall yo see the other.
    Yo do remember all the circmstance?
  Hor. Remember it, my lord!
  Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
    That wold not let me sleep. Methoght I lay
    Worse than the mtinies in the bilboes. Rashly-
    And prais'd be rashness for it; let s know,
    Or indiscretion sometime serves s well
    When or deep plots do pall; and that shold learn s
    There's a divinity that shapes or ends,
    Rogh-hew them how we will-
  Hor. That is most certain.
  Ham. Up from my cabin,
    My sea-gown scarf'd abot me, in the dark
    Grop'd I to find ot them; had my desire,
    Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
    To mine own room again; making so bold  
    (My fears forgetting manners) to nseal
    Their grand commission; where I fond, Horatio
    (O royal knavery!), an exact command,
    Larded with many several sorts of reasons,
    Importing Denmark's health, and England's too,
    With, hoo! sch bgs and goblins in my life-
    That, on the spervise, no leisre bated,
    No, not to stay the finding of the axe,
    My head shold be strck off.
  Hor. Is't possible?
  Ham. Here's the commission; read it at more leisre.
    Bt wilt tho bear me how I did proceed?
  Hor. I beseech yo.
  Ham. Being ths benetted rond with villanies,
    Or I cold make a prologe to my brains,
    They had begn the play. I sat me down;
    Devis'd a new commission; wrote it fair.
    I once did hold it, as or statists do,
    A baseness to write fair, and labor'd mch
    How to forget that learning; bt, sir, now  
    It did me yeoman's service. Wilt tho know
    Th' effect of what I wrote?
  Hor. Ay, good my lord.
  Ham. An earnest conjration from the King,
    As England was his faithfl tribtary,
    As love between them like the palm might florish,
    As peace shold still her wheaten garland wear
    And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
    And many sch-like as's of great charge,
    That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
    Withot debatement frther, more or less,
    He shold the bearers pt to sdden death,
    Not shriving time allow'd.
  Hor. How was this seal'd?
  Ham. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
    I had my father's signet in my prse,
    which was the model of that Danish seal;
    Folded the writ p in the form of th' other,
    Sbscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,
    The changeling never known. Now, the next day  
    Was or sea-fight; and what to this was seqent
    Tho know'st already.
  Hor. So Gildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.
  Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
    They are not near my conscience; their defeat
    Does by their own insination grow.
    'Tis dangeros when the baser natre comes
    Between the pass and fell incensed points
    Of mighty opposites.
  Hor. Why, what a king is this!
  Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now pon-
    He that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother;
    Popp'd in between th' election and my hopes;
    Thrown ot his angle for my Proper life,
    And with sch coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience
    To qit him with this arm? And is't not to be damn'd
    To let this canker of or natre come
    In frther evil?
  Hor. It mst be shortly known to him from England
    What is the isse of the bsiness there.  
  Ham. It will be short; the interim is mine,
    And a man's life is no more than to say 'one.'
    Bt I am very sorry, good Horatio,
    That to Laertes I forgot myself,
    For by the image of my case I see
    The portraitre of his. I'll cort his favors.
    Bt sre the bravery of his grief did pt me
    Into a tow'ring passion.
  Hor. Peace! Who comes here?

                 Enter yong Osric, a cortier.

  Osr. Yor lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
  Ham. I hmbly thank yo, sir. [Aside to Horatio] Dost know this
    waterfly?
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] No, my good lord.
  Ham. [aside to Horatio] Thy state is the more gracios; for 'tis a
    vice to know him. He hath mch land, and fertile. Let a beast be
    lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis
    a chogh; bt, as I say, spacios in the possession of dirt.  
  Osr. Sweet lord, if yor lordship were at leisre, I shold impart
    a thing to yo from his Majesty.
  Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Pt yor
    bonnet to his right se. 'Tis for the head.
  Osr. I thank yor lordship, it is very hot.
  Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.
  Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
  Ham. Bt yet methinks it is very sltry and hot for my complexion.
  Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sltry, as 'twere- I cannot
    tell how. Bt, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to yo that
    he has laid a great wager on yor head. Sir, this is the matter-
  Ham. I beseech yo remember.
                           [Hamlet moves him to pt on his hat.]
  Osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
    newly come to cort Laertes; believe me, an absolte gentleman,
    fll of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
    great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
    or calendar of gentry; for yo shall find in him the continent of
    what part a gentleman wold see.
  Ham. Sir, his definement sffers no perdition in yo; thogh, I  
    know, to divide him inventorially wold dozy th' arithmetic of
    memory, and yet bt yaw neither in respect of his qick sail.
    Bt, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a sol of great
    article, and his infsion of sch dearth and rareness as, to make
    tre diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else
    wold trace him, his mbrage, nothing more.
  Osr. Yor lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
  Ham. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in or more
    rawer breath
  Osr. Sir?
  Hor [aside to Hamlet] Is't not possible to nderstand in another
    tonge? Yo will do't, sir, really.
  Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentleman
  Osr. Of Laertes?
  Hor. [aside] His prse is empty already. All's golden words are
    spent.
  Ham. Of him, sir.
  Osr. I know yo are not ignorant-
  Ham. I wold yo did, sir; yet, in faith, if yo did, it wold not
    mch approve me. Well, sir?  
  Osr. Yo are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is-
  Ham. I dare not confess that, lest I shold compare with him in
    excellence; bt to know a man well were to know himself.
  Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; bt in the imptation laid on him
    by them, in his meed he's nfellowed.
  Ham. What's his weapon?
  Osr. Rapier and dagger.
  Ham. That's two of his weapons- bt well.
  Osr. The King, sir, hath wager'd with him six Barbary horses;
    against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French
    rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
    so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
    very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
    very liberal conceit.
  Ham. What call yo the carriages?
  Hor. [aside to Hamlet] I knew yo mst be edified by the margent
    ere yo had done.
  Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
  Ham. The phrase wold be more germane to the matter if we cold
    carry cannon by or sides. I wold it might be hangers till then.  
    Bt on! Six Barbary horses against six French swords, their
    assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the French
    bet against the Danish. Why is this all impon'd, as yo call it?
  Osr. The King, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
    yorself and him, he shall not exceed yo three hits; he hath
    laid on twelve for nine, and it wold come to immediate trial
    if yor lordship wold vochsafe the answer.
  Ham. How if I answer no?
  Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of yor person in trial.
  Ham. Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty,
    it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be
    broght, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his prpose,
    I will win for him if I can; if not, I will gain nothing bt my
    shame and the odd hits.
  Osr. Shall I redeliver yo e'en so?
  Ham. To this effect, sir, after what florish yor natre will.
  Osr. I commend my dty to yor lordship.
  Ham. Yors, yors. [Exit Osric.] He does well to commend it
    himself; there are no tonges else for's trn.
  Hor. This lapwing rns away with the shell on his head.  
  Ham. He did comply with his dg before he sck'd it. Ths has he,
    and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes
    on, only got the tne of the time and otward habit of enconter-
    a kind of yesty collection, which carries them throgh and
    throgh the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do bt blow
    them to their trial-the bbbles are ot,

                            Enter a Lord.

  Lord. My lord, his Majesty commended him to yo by yong Osric, who
    brings back to him, that yo attend him in the hall. He sends to
    know if yor pleasre hold to play with Laertes, or that yo will
    take longer time.
  Ham. I am constant to my prposes; they follow the King's pleasre.
    If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided
    I be so able as now.
  Lord. The King and Qeen and all are coming down.
  Ham. In happy time.
  Lord. The Qeen desires yo to se some gentle entertainment to
    Laertes before yo fall to play.  
  Ham. She well instrcts me.
                                                    [Exit Lord.]
  Hor. Yo will lose this wager, my lord.
  Ham. I do not think so. Since he went into France I have been in
    continal practice. I shall win at the odds. Bt tho woldst not
    think how ill all's here abot my heart. Bt it is no matter.
  Hor. Nay, good my lord -
  Ham. It is bt foolery; bt it is sch a kind of gaingiving as
    wold perhaps troble a woman.
  Hor. If yor mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
    repair hither and say yo are not fit.
  Ham. Not a whit, we defy agry; there's a special providence in
    the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be
    not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come:
    the readiness is all. Since no man knows aght of what he leaves,
    what is't to leave betimes? Let be.

    Enter King, Qeen, Laertes, Osric, and Lords, with other
              Attendants with foils and gantlets.
               A table and flagons of wine on it.  

  King. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
                    [The King pts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]
  Ham. Give me yor pardon, sir. I have done yo wrong;
    Bt pardon't, as yo are a gentleman.
    This presence knows,
    And yo mst needs have heard, how I am pnish'd
    With sore distraction. What I have done
    That might yor natre, honor, and exception
    Roghly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
    Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet.
    If Hamlet from himself be taken away,
    And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
    Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.
    Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,
    Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
    His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
    Sir, in this adience,
    Let my disclaiming from a prpos'd evil
    Free me so far in yor most generos thoghts  
    That I have shot my arrow o'er the hose
    And hrt my brother.
  Laer. I am satisfied in natre,
    Whose motive in this case shold stir me most
    To my revenge. Bt in my terms of honor
    I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
    Till by some elder masters of known honor
    I have a voice and precedent of peace
    To keep my name ngor'd. Bt till that time
    I do receive yor offer'd love like love,
    And will not wrong it.
  Ham. I embrace it freely,
    And will this brother's wager frankly play.
    Give s the foils. Come on.
  Laer. Come, one for me.
  Ham. I'll be yor foil, Laertes. In mine ignorance
    Yor skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
    Stick fiery off indeed.
  Laer. Yo mock me, sir.
  Ham. No, by this bad.  
  King. Give them the foils, yong Osric. Cosin Hamlet,
    Yo know the wager?
  Ham. Very well, my lord.
    Yor Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
  King. I do not fear it, I have seen yo both;
    Bt since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
  Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another.
  Ham. This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
                                                Prepare to play.
  Osr. Ay, my good lord.
  King. Set me the stops of wine pon that table.
    If Hamlet give the first or second hit,
    Or qit in answer of the third exchange,
    Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
    The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
    And in the cp an nion shall he throw
    Richer than that which for sccessive kings
    In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cps;
    And let the kettle to the trmpet speak,
    The trmpet to the cannoneer withot,  
    The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
    'Now the King drinks to Hamlet.' Come, begin.
    And yo the jdges, bear a wary eye.
  Ham. Come on, sir.
  Laer. Come, my lord.                                They play.
  Ham. One.
  Laer. No.
  Ham. Jdgment!
  Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit.
  Laer. Well, again!
  King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
    Here's to thy health.
               [Drm; trmpets sond; a piece goes off [within].
    Give him the cp.
  Ham. I'll play this bot first; set it by awhile.
    Come. (They play.) Another hit. What say yo?
  Laer. A toch, a toch; I do confess't.
  King. Or son shall win.
  Qeen. He's fat, and scant of breath.
    Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rb thy brows.  
    The Qeen caroses to thy fortne, Hamlet.
  Ham. Good madam!
  King. Gertrde, do not drink.
  Qeen. I will, my lord; I pray yo pardon me.          Drinks.
  King. [aside] It is the poison'd cp; it is too late.
  Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.
  Qeen. Come, let me wipe thy face.
  Laer. My lord, I'll hit him now.
  King. I do not think't.
  Laer. [aside] And yet it is almost against my conscience.
  Ham. Come for the third, Laertes! Yo bt dally.
    pray Yo Pass with yor best violence;
    I am afeard Yo make a wanton of me.
  Laer. Say yo so? Come on.                               Play.
  Osr. Nothing neither way.
  Laer. Have at yo now!
                [Laertes wonds Hamlet; then] in scffling, they
                    change rapiers, [and Hamlet wonds Laertes].
  King. Part them! They are incens'd.
  Ham. Nay come! again!                         The Qeen falls.  
  Osr. Look to the Qeen there, ho!
  Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
  Osr. How is't, Laertes?
  Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
    I am jstly kill'd with mine own treachery.
  Ham. How does the Qeen?
  King. She sonds to see them bleed.
  Qeen. No, no! the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!
    The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.                 [Dies.]
  Ham. O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd.
    Treachery! Seek it ot.
                                                [Laertes falls.]
  Laer. It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, tho art slain;
    No medicine in the world can do thee good.
    In thee there is not half an hor of life.
    The treacheros instrment is in thy hand,
    Unbated and envenom'd. The fol practice
    Hath trn'd itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
    Never to rise again. Thy mother's poison'd.
    I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.  
  Ham. The point envenom'd too?
    Then, venom, to thy work.                    Hrts the King.
  All. Treason! treason!
  King. O, yet defend me, friends! I am bt hrt.
  Ham. Here, tho incestos, mrd'ros, damned Dane,
    Drink off this potion! Is thy nion here?
    Follow my mother.                                 King dies.
  Laer. He is jstly serv'd.
    It is a poison temper'd by himself.
    Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
    Mine and my father's death come not pon thee,
    Nor thine on me!                                       Dies.
  Ham. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
    I am dead, Horatio. Wretched qeen, adie!
    Yo that look pale and tremble at this chance,
    That are bt mtes or adience to this act,
    Had I bt time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
    Is strict in his arrest) O, I cold tell yo-
    Bt let it be. Horatio, I am dead;
    Tho liv'st; report me and my case aright  
    To the nsatisfied.
  Hor. Never believe it.
    I am more an antiqe Roman than a Dane.
    Here's yet some liqor left.
  Ham. As th'art a man,
    Give me the cp. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha't.
    O good Horatio, what a wonded name
    (Things standing ths nknown) shall live behind me!
    If tho didst ever hold me in thy heart,
    Absent thee from felicity awhile,
    And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
    To tell my story.         [March afar off, and shot within.]
    What warlike noise is this?
  Osr. Yong Fortinbras, with conqest come from Poland,
    To the ambassadors of England gives
    This warlike volley.
  Ham. O, I die, Horatio!
    The potent poison qite o'ercrows my spirit.
    I cannot live to hear the news from England,
    Bt I do prophesy th' election lights  
    On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice.
    So tell him, with th' occrrents, more and less,
    Which have solicited- the rest is silence.             Dies.
  Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
    And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
                                                 [March within.]
    Why does the drm come hither?

    Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassadors, with Drm,
                  Colors, and Attendants.

  Fort. Where is this sight?
  Hor. What is it yo will see?
    If aght of woe or wonder, cease yor search.
  Fort. This qarry cries on havoc. O prod Death,
    What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
    That tho so many princes at a shot
    So bloodily hast strck.
  Ambassador. The sight is dismal;
    And or affairs from England come too late.  
    The ears are senseless that shold give s bearing
    To tell him his commandment is flfill'd
    That Rosencrantz and Gildenstern are dead.
    Where shold We have or thanks?
  Hor. Not from his moth,
    Had it th' ability of life to thank yo.
    He never gave commandment for their death.
    Bt since, so jmp pon this bloody qestion,
    Yo from the Polack wars, and yo from England,
    Are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
    High on a stage be placed to the view;
    And let me speak to the yet nknowing world
    How these things came abot. So shall Yo hear
    Of carnal, bloody and nnatral acts;
    Of accidental jdgments, casal slaghters;
    Of deaths pt on by cnning and forc'd case;
    And, in this pshot, prposes mistook
    Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
    Trly deliver.
  Fort. Let s haste to hear it,  
    And call the noblest to the adience.
    For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortne.
    I have some rights of memory in this kingdom
    Which now, to claim my vantage doth invite me.
  Hor. Of that I shall have also case to speak,
    And from his moth whose voice will draw on more.
    Bt let this same be presently perform'd,
    Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
    On plots and errors happen.
  Fort. Let for captains
    Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
    For he was likely, had he been pt on,
    To have prov'd most royally; and for his passage
    The soldiers' msic and the rites of war
    Speak lodly for him.
    Take p the bodies. Sch a sight as this
    Becomes the field bt here shows mch amiss.
    Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
            Exent marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
                                                   are shot off.  


THE END
